1 5  - 0  1 0  7  Amdt.#  j 

~CEIVfa 

DEC  1 8 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

December 14, 2015 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
PO Box 994255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-25550 

Re: AG Initiative #15-0107 - Technical Amendment 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

With this letter we submit an amended version of our proposed statewide ballot measure 
("The Water Priorities Public Interest and Public Trust Constitutional Amendment and the New 
Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Bond Act of 2016") in accordance with Article II 
of Section 10( d)  of the California Constitution.  We are the proponents of the measure. 

These amendments are reasonably germane to the theme, purpose or substance of the 

measure. 

Thank you for your time and attention. 

Sincerely, 

George Runner 

December 14, 2015 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
PO Box 994255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-25550 

Re: AG Initiative #15-0107 -Technical Amendment 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

With this letter we submit an amended version of our proposed statewide ballot measure 
("The Water Priorities Public Interest and Public Trust Constitutional Amendment and the New 
Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Bond Act of 2016") in accordance with Article II 
of Section 10(d) of the California Constitution.  We are the proponents of the measure. 

These amendments are reasonably germane to the theme, purpose or substance of the 

measure. 

Thank you for your time and attention. 

Sincerely, 

Robert Huff 

- 1 5  - 0  1 0  7  Amal #  J 

INITIATIVE MEASURE TO  BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

SECTION 1.  WATER PRIORITIES PUBLIC INTEREST AND PUBLIC TRUST 
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT 

Part 1.0 

Findings and Declarations 

The people of the State of California find and declare all of the following: 

(a) Safeguarding supplies of clean, safe drinking water to California's homes and 
businesses and water for irrigation to California's farms is an essential responsibility of 
government, and critical to protecting the quality oflife for Californians. 

(b) Every Californian should have access to clean, safe, and reliable drinking water 

and California farms to irrigation water, consistent with Article X of the California 
Constitution. Providing adequate supplies of clean, safe, and reliable water is vital to 
keeping California's economy growing and strong and meetthe needs of the State's 
population. 

(c) The California Constitution and the California Water Code, court decisions and 

administrative agency interpretations of beneficial use, public use and the public trust have 
imposed substantial legal and administrative impediments to the accomplishment of the 
people's priorities with respect to water use. 

( d) These legal and administrative impediments have thwarted the development of 

new surface water and groundwater storage facilities mandated by the voters and have 
wrapped those projects in endless court challenges and administrative red tape. 

(e) The State Legislature  has failed to exercise its legislative powers over the state's 

water resources granted under Article X,  California Constitution and as a result various 
agencies, boards, and commissions have asserted power and authority to regulate and 
enforce the laws of the state in the Legislature's name, or the uncertainty about the 
exercise of such powers has required adjudication and remediation actions by and in the 
courts, with outcomes and precedents that may not have correctly interpreted or reflected 
the Legislature's intentions about the use of the state's water resources. 

(f) This division is intended to promote the coequal goals, as defined in Section 

85054 of the Water Code, of providing a more reliable water supply for California through 
advancing the primary water criteria set forth in Article X,  section 2 of the California Article 
X,  California Constitution, is amended by adding the following subsection 2.5, as follows: 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

1 

Part2.0 
new Section 2.5, as follows: 

Article X of the California Constitution is hereby amended by adding 

2.5.  Reasonable and Beneficial Public Uses of Water -- Priorities 

Because of the conditions prevailing in this State, and in furtherance of the provisions 
of section 2 hereof, including those provisions regarding beneficial uses, rights and 
appropriations of water resources, the public interest in assuring the highest priorities of 
beneficial use and water conservation, as a public benefit and to satisfy the public trust, 
shall be first, domestic use, and second, irrigation use through the development and 
maintenance of surface water and groundwater storage facilities. Establishment and 
designation of priorities for the reasonable and beneficial uses of water, as a public 
benefit 

in satisfaction of the public trust, are reserved to the People. 

SECTION 2.  THE NEW SURFACE WATER AND GROUNDWATER STORAGE FACILITIES 
BOND ACT OF 2016 

Part 1.0 

Findings and Declarations 

The people of the State of California find and declare all of the following: 

(a)  This measure implements measure implements in part the will and direction of 

the People as established in Article X, section 2.5 of the California Constitution, by 
providing California additional water supplies for domestic and irrigation use by its People. 

(b)  California faces a water-supply crisis spurred by inadequate anticipation of 

state water needs and our periodic drought, while the high-speed rail project adopted by 
voters in 2008 faces growing and dismaying reports that the project's costs will mushroom, 
its prospects for completion of the entire route, from San Francisco to Los Angeles with 
Sacramento and San Diego legs, are dismal, and potential federal and private funding 
sources have vanished.  $ 8 billion dollars of uncontracted high speed rail bonds sit 
uncommitted and unusable. Even if issued, the total funding provided by Proposition 
lA would be a drop in the bucket to funding the real eventual costs of a high-speed rail 
system equal to that promised to voters, already estimated at from $68 to $100 billion.  The 
high-speed rail bonds should be reallocated and redirected, as permitted by Article XVI, 
section 1 of the California Constitution, to address California's immediate and higher 
priority water supply needs. 

(c)  On November 4, 2008, the voters approved Proposition lA, the "Safe, Reliable 

High-Speed Passenger Train Bond Act," which authorized the State of California to issue up 
to $9.95 billion in bonds to construct a high-speed train system and established the 
framework and requirements that the system would be required to achieve. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

2 

(d) On November 4, 2014, the voters approved Proposition 1, the "Water Quality, 

Supply, and Infrastructure Improvement Act of 2014," which authorized the state of 
California to issue up to $7.1 billion in bonds and redirected $425 million in unsold general 
obligation bonds that were previously approved by voters for resource-related uses to fund 
various water-related programs, including $2.7 billion in bonds for public benefits 
associated with water storage projects that improve the operation of the state water 
system, are cost effective, and provide a net improvement in ecosystem and water quality 
conditions. 

(e) This bond measure does not authorize additional net state bond obligations.  It 
redirects existing bond funding authority from Proposition 1A (2008) and Proposition 1 
(2014), for the purposes and the reasons described more fully herein. 

(f)  Every Californian should have access to clean, safe, and reliable drinking water 

and California farms to irrigation water, consistent with Article X of the California 
Constitution, section 2.5. Providing adequate supplies of clean, safe, and reliable water is 
vital to keeping California's economy growing and strong and meets the needs of the State's 
population. 

(g) Periodic drought has impaired California's capacity to of ensure sufficient 
supplies and reserves of clean, safe, and reliable water, droughts have become more 
frequent and more severe, and ecosystems have become stressed. Higher temperatures 
mean less snow pack, which is the state's largest water reservoir. State water agencies 
project a loss of at least 25 percent of the snow pack in the Sierra Nevada Mountains by 
2050. The Colorado River basin, which provides drinking water to southern California, has 
experienced prolonged drought. 

(h) California's water infrastructure continues to age and deteriorate. More than 50 
years ago, Californians approved the construction of the State Water Project. In the decades 
that followed, California's water leaders developed the most sophisticated system of state, 
federal, regional, and local water infrastructure anywhere in the world. Failure to complete 
the State Water Project as originally designed has resulted in it being unable to adequately 
serve its intended purpose. 

(i)  In the years since the voters approved the State Water Project and the Federal 
Central Valley Project was approved, California's population has continued to grow, from 
less than 16 million in 1960 to more than 39 million in 2015. A growing population and a 
growing economy have put greater stress on California's natural resources, including 
water. The Department of Finance projects that California's population will reach 50 
million by 2049. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

3 

U) A growing population and a growing economy have put greater stress on 

California's natural resources, including water quality, as documented by the U.S. 
Geological Survey, the California Department of Water Resources, and the University of 
California. 

(k) ~s California has grown and its water infrastructure has failed to keep up with 
that growth, increasing demands on California's limited water supplies, continuing needs 
for flood and earthquake disaster protection, and deteriorating aquatic ecosystems have 
led to intense conflict, further threatening the reliability of clean and safe drinking water. 

(l) Since the passage of Proposition lA, the voters have learned that the high-speed 

train system will not be able to meet any of the requirements of that measure. 

(1) Estimated construction costs for the project have more than doubled; 

(2) Promised travel times will be significantly longer; 

(3)  Travel speeds will be significantly slower than the "high speed" 200 miles-an(cid:173)

hour speeds; 

(4) Train routes will have intrusive impacts on communities and the environment; 

(5) Despite recent reports that the High-Speed Rail Authority has solicited potential 

private and foreign government investment interest, the Authority acknowledges that no 
such potential investors are likely to participate in funding of the project, and the project 
will not be financially viable without significant ongoing public subsidies in the tens of 
billions of dollars; and, 

(6) Technology advances have made obsolete the design concept approved by 

voters. 

(m) All remaining authorized and appropriated but unissued bonds from the Safe, 

Reliable High-Speed Passenger Train Bond Act should be redirected to provide that no 
further bonds shall be sold for high-speed rail and related rail purposes and instead that 
they shall be sold only for specified purposes authorized under this measure. 

(n) All uncommitted net proceeds received by the High Speed Rail Authority from 

outstanding bonds issued and sold prior to the effective date of the initiative should also be 
redirected from high-speed rail purposes to specified purposes authorized under this 
measure. 

( o) Since the passage of Proposition 1, the public has learned that restrictions in 

Proposition 1 limit uses of its funding to water storage projects that provide at least half of 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

4 

their public benefits for purposes unrelated to the beneficial uses and conservation of 
water for domestic use and irrigation use as established in Article X,  section 2.5 of 
California Constitution, and find that they are an unacceptable limitation on the priority of 
use of funds appropriated for public benefits associated with water storage projects. 

(p) A specified portion of authorized but unissued bonds from the Water Quality, 

Supply, and Infrastructure Improvement Act of 2014 should be redirected to provide that 
no bonds shall be sold for the public benefits associated with water storage projects that 
improve the operation of the state water system as provided in that Act under Water Code 
Section 79750 and direct instead that they shall be sold only for specified purposes 
authorized under this measure. 

( q) The California Water Commission, an appointed and unelected body charged 

with responsibilities for overseeing and approving expenditures of funds from Proposition 
1 under Water Code Section 79750, is insufficiently representative of the population of the 
State as a whole, the various geographic regions of the State, and of the will of the people 
with respect to assessing public benefits for purposes related to the beneficial uses and 
conservation of water, including water for domestic use and irrigation use, and, as such is 
an inappropriate authority to fairly oversee the selection and implementation of projects 
providing public benefits associated with water storage projects that improve the 
operation of the state water system as established in Article X,  section 2.5 of the California 
Constitution. 

Part 3.0  Reallocation Of Previously Authorized Bond Authority And Funds 

1.  Section 2704.105 is added to Chapter 20 (commencing with Section 2704) of Division 3 

of the Streets and Highways Code, to read: 

Notwithstanding any other law, all unencumbered assets of issued bonds and unissued 
bonds authorized for purposes of this division up to eight billion dollars 
($8,000,000,000) are reallocated for the purposes of, and shall be authorized, issued, and 
appropriated in accordance with, Division 26.8 ( commencing with Section 79800) of the 
Water Code. The funds available for reallocation shall be made on a pro-rata basis from 
each bond allocation of this division. 

2.  Section 79750.5 is added to the Division 26.7 of the Water Code, to read: 

Notwithstanding any other law, all unencumbered assets of issued bonds, bonds authorized 
for issuance prior to the effective date of this measure, and unissued bonds authorized 
for the purposes of this division up to two billion seven hundred million 
($2, 700,000,000) are reallocated for the purposes of, and shall be authorized, issued, and 
appropriated in accordance with, Division 26.8 ( commencing with Section 79800) of the 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

5 

Water Code. The funds available for reallocation shall be made on a pro-rata basis from 
each bond allocation of this division. 

Part 4.0  New Surface Water And Groundwater Facilities 

New Division 26.8 is added to the Water Code, entitled "State New Surface Water and 
Groundwater Storage Facilities" to read: 

Chapter 1. General 

79800. This part shall be known and may be cited as the State New Surface Water and 
Groundwater Storage Facilities Bond Act of 2016. 

Article 1. 

79801  Findings: 

The People of California find and declare all of the following,in addition to the findings set 
forth in Sectionl , Part 1.0 of this Measure: 

(a) This bond measure implements in part the will and direction of the People as 
established in Article X, section 2.5 of the California Constitution, by providing California 
additional water supplies for domestic and irrigation use by its People. 

(b) California needs water quality improvements at all parts of the hydrologic cycle, 
from source water in the watersheds where the state's drinking water supplies originate to 
groundwater facilities. 

( c) Addressing the challenges to the heart of the California water system, will help 

resolve some of the conflicts that impede progress in improving the statewide water 
system. 

( d) Key to achieving these goals is the critical necessity to construct new state 
surface water storage and groundwater storage facilities and to improve and enhance 
existing state water storage facilities and groundwater storage facilities. 

( e) Development of the new water storage and groundwater storage facilities, and 
improvement of the existing water storage facilities provided for in this measure will not 
diminish, impair, or otherwise affect matters of public benefit or for the public trust, 
including but not limited to, any area of origin, watershed of origin, county of origin, or 
other water rights protections, including, but not limited to, rights to water appropriated 
prior to December 19, 1914, provided under existing law. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

6 

(f) This measure clarifies the locus of authority in the Authority created by this 

measure to make such determinations that the water projects provided for herein do not 
diminish, impair, or otherwise affect matters of public benefit or for the public trust, 
including but not limited to, any area of origin, watershed of origin, county of origin, or 
other water rights protections. 

79802. 
It is the intent of the People that: 

(a) The investment of public funds pursuant to this division will result in public 

benefits to the public trust that address the most critical statewide needs and priorities for 
public funding in preference to other needs and priorities that may exist. 

(b) In the appropriation and expenditure of funding authorized by this division, 

priority will be given to new surface water and groundwater storage facilities projects that 
provide for use of private, federal, or local funding and produce the greatest public benefit, 
as established in Article X, section 2.5 of the California Constitution. 

(c) A funded project advances the purposes of the chapter from which the project 

received funding. 

( d) In making decisions regarding water resources, the Executive Branch, the 
Legislature, and state and local water agencies must use recent research based upon 
confirmed, reproducible and transparent scientific principles and currently available 
technologies to inform those decisions. 

( e) The State Legislature has allowed state agencies to exercise its powers under 

Article X,  California Constitution to make determinations that water projects do not 
diminish, impair, or otherwise affect matters of public benefit or for the public trust, 
including but not limited to, any area of origin, watershed of origin, county of origin, or 
other water rights protections; and as to this measure, and the projects authorized 
hereunder, the Legislature, by a vote of its members, should be authorized to accept or 
reject the Authority's determinations concerning such matters, in supervention of any 
determinations by a state agency. 

79803.  Definitions 

Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section govern the 
construction of this division, as follows: 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

7 

(a) "Acquisition" means obtaining a fee interest or any other interest in real 

property, including, easements, leases, water, water rights, or interest in water obtained for 
the purposes of instream flows and development rights. 

(b) "Authority" means the State Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Authority 

created by Section 79804. 

(c) "CALFED Bay-Delta Program" means the program described in the Record of 

Decision dated August 28, 2000. 

(d) "Commission" means the California Water Commission. 

(e) "Committee" means the State Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Finance 

Committee created by Section 79807. 

(f) "Department" means the Department of Water Resources. 

(g) "Director" means the Director of Water Resources. 

(h) "Environmental Secretary" means the Secretary of the Environmental Protection 

Agency. 

(i) "Fund" means the State New Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities 

Fund created by Section 79811. 

0) "Integrated regional water management plan" has the meaning set forth in Part 

2.2 (commencing with Section 10530) of Division 6, as that part may be amended. 

(k) "Long-term" means for a period of not less than 20 years. 

(I) "Nonprofit organization" means an organization qualified to do business in 
California and qualified under Section 501(c) (3) of Title 26 of the United States Code. 

(m) "Proposition 1A" means the "Safe, Reliable High-Speed Passenger Train Bond 

Act For The 21st Century," adopted by the voters on November 4, 2008. 

(n) "Proposition 1" means  the "Water Quality, Supply, and Infrastructure 

Improvement Act of 2014," adopted by the voters on November 4, 2014. 

( o) "Public agency'' means a state agency or department, special district, joint 

powers authority, city, county, city and county, or other political subdivision of the state. 

(p)  "Secretary" means the Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency. 

(q) "State Board" means the State Water Resources Control Board. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

8 

(r) "State General Obligation Bond Law" means the State General Obligation Bond 
Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the 
Government Code). 

(s) "Water right" means a legal entitlement authorizing water to be diverted from a 

specified source and put to a beneficial, nonwasteful use. 

Article 2.  State Water Storage and Groundwater Storage Facilities Authority 

79804.  State Water Storage and Groundwater Storage Facilities Authority 

(a) There is in the Department of Water Resources a State Water Storage and 

Groundwater Storage Facilities Authority. 

(b) (1) The Authority is composed of nine members as follows: 

(A) 

Eight (8) members nominated and elected by the Regional Water 

Management Groups of the state, with two (2) members to be nominated and elected by 
the Regional Water Management Groups resident within each of the four (4) Department of 
Water Resources Administrative Regions, provided for in Chapter 4 of Part 2.2 
( commencing with Section 10530) of Division 6 of the Water Code; and, 

(B)  One  (1) member nominated and elected at large by all of such Regional Water 

Management Groups. 

(C)  Each Regional Water Management Group may nominate up to two (2) 

candidates at each election to fill  each eligible member vacancy of the Authority 
in its Department of Water Resources Administrative Region as provided in 
Section 79804(b) (1) (A)  and may nominate one (1) member candidate to fill 
the at-large member vacancy as provided in Section 79804(b) (1)  (B). 

(D)  Each Regional Water Management Group may cast one (1) vote per vacancy for 
the candidates nominated to fill each member position of the Authority at each 
election provided for in Section 79804(b)(l) or for elections of replacement 
members provided for in Section 89804(c). 

(c)  Except as provided in subdivision (d), and until their successors are elected, 

members of the Authority shall hold office for terms of four ( 4) years, and no member shall 
serve for more than two (2) four-year terms. A vacancy shall be filled by election by the 
participating Regional Water Management Groups, who shall elect a replacement member 
within 90 days of a vacancy to serve the remainder of the term.  In no event shall a member 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

9 

whose second two-year term has expired hold over more than 150 days from the end of the 
expired term. 

(d) (1)  In order to provide for evenly staggered terms, persons elected or reelected 
to the Authority after January 1, 2017, shall be elected to initial terms to expire as follows: 

(A)  Of the eight persons elected by  pursuant to subsection (b)(l)(A), two shall be 

elected for a term that expires on December 31, 2018; two shall be elected for to a term 
that expires on December 31, 2019; two shall be elected for a term that expires on 
December 31, 2020 and two shall be elected for to a term which expires on December 31, 
2021, provided, however, that no two members' simultaneous expiring terms shall include 
both representatives of a single Department of Water Resources Administrative Region 
elected pursuantto Section 79804(b)(l)(A). 

(B) The Director shall conduct the initial election for members not later than March 

30, 2017, and not less than forty-five days before such election, shall determine by lot 
which persons shall be elected to each staggered term and shall notify the participating 
Regional Water Management Groups that elect members of the Authority of the election 
and the members to be elected.  Thereafter, thereafter, the Executive Director of the 
Authority shall conduct the elections for members of the Authority. 

(2) Following expiration of each of the initial terms provided for in this subdivision 

( d)  (1 ), the term shall expire every four years thereafter on December 31. 

( e) Members of the Authority are subject to the Political Reform Act of 197 4 (Title 9 

of the Government Code ( commencing with Section 81000)). 

(f) From among its members, the Authority shall elect a chairperson, who shall 

preside at all meetings of the Authority, and a vice chairperson to preside in the absence of 
the chairperson. The chairperson shall serve a term of one year. 

(g) Five members of the Authority constitute a quorum for taking any action by the 

Authority. 

(h) Each member of the Authority shall receive compensation of one hundred 

dollars ($100) for each day that the member is attending to the business of the Authority, 
but shall not receive more than five hundred dollars ($500) in any calendar month. 

(i) Members of the Authority shall be reimbursed for their actual travel expenses 

incurred in attending to the business of the Authority. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

10 

79805.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Authority 

(a) The Authority shall be exclusively responsible to authorize and direct the 

development of plans and construction of the new water storage and groundwater storage 
facilities set forth in Section 79813(a) (1) through (a) ( 4), with the concurrence of the 
Department, and shall work with the Department to prepare such plans and estimates, and 
render such reports as shall be necessary and appropriate under Sections 12616 through 
12625, inclusive. 

(b) The Authority shall recommend to the Department with respect to the 

construction of any such project, the time for constructing it, the amount of funds which 
should be appropriated to counties, cities, stage agencies or public districts for the project. 

(c)  (1) The Authority shall authorize the expenditure of funds for the purposes of 

implementation of construction of the new water storage and groundwater storage 
facilities set forth in Section 79813. 

(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of Section 79805, the Authority may elect, 

in its sole discretion, to accept and adopt as fully compliant with Section 79805: (A) any 
prior approval by the Commission of any water storage project, in whole or in part, made 
before enactment of this measure, or (B) any authorization by the Commission to issue 
bonds and expend bond funds for any water storage project, as provided in Section 79750, 
or (C) any timetable or schedule of completion approved by the Commission for any water 
storage project, including any schedule for issuance of bonds funding said water storage 
project, provided, however, that said project or part of project, as accepted and adopted, 
shall also fulfill the purposes set forth in Section 79813. 

(d) Notwithstanding Section 162, the Authority may make the determinations, 

findings, and recommendations required of it by this chapter independent of the views of 
the Director. All final actions by the Authority in implementing this chapter shall be taken 
by a majority of the members of the Authority at a public meeting noticed and held 
pursuant to the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act (Article 9 ( commencing with Section 
11120) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code). 

(e)  Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, as provided more 

particularly in this measure, up to ten billion eight hundred million 
dollars ($10,800,000,000) is hereby continuously appropriated from the fund 
until December 31, 2030, without regard to fiscal years, to the Authority for public benefits 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

11 

associated with new water storage and groundwater storage facilities, upgrades to existing 
water storage and groundwater storage facilities, in accordance with Section '.79$13. Funds 
authorized for, or made available to, the Authority pursuant to this chapter shall be 
available and expended only for the purposes provided in this chapter, and shall not be 
subject to appropriation or transfer by the Legislature or the Governor for any other 
purpose. 

(f)  The Section 79813 projects approved by the Authority shall utilize a competitive 

public process that ranks potential projects based on the expected return for public 
investment as measured by the magnitude of the public benefits provided, pursuant to 
criteria established under this Division. 

(g)  Any project constructed with funds provided by this chapter shall be subject to 

Section 11590. 

(h) The Authority shall give such notices of investigations, hearings, workshops or 

other proceedings in relation to its responsibilities set forth in this Division to the agencies, 
cities, counties, districts or persons deemed likely by the Authority or the Department to be 
interested, to afford them an opportunity to be heard in connection with such matters. 

(i)  The Authority shall report to the Department, the Legislature and the Governor 

on the progress of authorization, contracting, construction and completion of the new 
water storage and groundwater storage facilities funded by the expenditures authorized by 
the Authority and paid from funds authorized by this chapter. 

0)  Prior to disbursing grants or loans pursuant to this division, the Authority, in 

consultation with the Department, shall develop and adopt project solicitation and 
evaluation guidelines. The guidelines shall include monitoring and reporting requirements 
and may include a limitation on the dollar amount of grants or loans to be awarded. If the 
Authority or the Department has previously developed and adopted project solicitation and 
evaluation guidelines that comply with the requirements of this subdivision, it may use 
those guidelines. 

(k) Prior to disbursing grants or loans, the Authority shall conduct a minimum of 
three public meetings in each of the four Department of Water Resources administrative 
regions, to consider public comments prior to finalizing the guidelines. The state agency 
shall publish the draft solicitation and evaluation guidelines on its Internet Web site at least 
30 days before the public meetings. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

12 

(1)  The Authority shall develop and adopt, by regulation, methods for quantification 

and management of public benefits described in Article X,  section 2.5 of the California 
Constitution, by December 15, 2017. 

( m)  The Authority may seek a writ of mandate under Chapter 2 of Title 1 of Part 3 of 

the Code of Civil Procedure (commencing with Section 1084) in any court of competent 
jurisdiction to compel the Secretary, the Environmental Secretary, the Director, the 
Department, the State Board or a state agency not to unreasonably withhold any such 
approval, permit or authorization necessary to implement the development and the 
implementation of construction of the new surface water storage and groundwater storage 
facilities provided for in Section 79813 or implement the mandates of Article X, section 2.5 
of the California Constitution, if the Authority has conducted all such proceedings, made 
such determinations, and completed such requirements as required by this division that 
are necessary to implement the construction of such new surface water and groundwater 
storage facilities. 

(n) The Authority may employ the State Attorney General to defend it in any action 
against the Authority.  In the event the State Attorney General should decline to represent 
the Authority, the Authority may contract with outside legal counsel for that purpose. 

79806. 

(a) The Authority shall appoint an executive director, exempt from civil service, who 

shall serve at the pleasure of the Authority, to administer the affairs of the Authority as 
directed by the Authority. 

(b) For purposes of managing and administering the  State Water Storage and 

Groundwater Storage Facilities Authority, the members of the Authority, upon the 
recommendation of the executive director, may appoint up to six additional individuals, 
including at least one individual who is a hydrologic engineer with large construction 
project experience, one individual with substantial expertise in the Central Valley Project 
planning and implementation process, one individual with substantial expertise in the in 
the State Water Project planning and implementation process and one individual with 
expertise in state groundwater development planning and implementation, who shall be 
exempt from civil service, who shall serve at the pleasure of the executive director, 
including: (1) Chief program manager.  (2) Up to three regional directors. (3) Chief financial 
officer. ( 4) Director of risk management and project controls. 

(c) The compensation of the executive director and the additional persons 

authorized by subdivision (b) shall be established by the Authority, and approved by the 
Department of Human Resources, in an amount that is reasonably necessary, in the 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

13 

discretion of the Authority, to attract and hold a person of superior qualifications. The 
Authority shall cause to be conducted, through the use of independent outside advisers, a 
salary survey to determine the compensation for the positions under this subdivision. The 
Department of Human Resources may, in its discretion, accept a previously completed 
salary survey that meets the requirements of this subdivision, and shall review the 
methodology used in the survey. The salary survey shall consider both of the following: 

(1) Other state, regional, and local water agencies that are most comparable to the 

Authority and its responsibilities. 

(2) Other relevant labor pools. 

The compensation set by the Authority shall not exceed the highest comparable 
compensation for a position of that type, as determined by the salary survey. Based on the 
salary survey, these positions shall be paid a salary established by the Authority and 
approved by the Department of Human Resources. 

( d) The executive director may, as authorized by the Authority, appoint necessary 

staff to carry out the provisions of this part. 

(e) The Authority may contract with other agencies of the Department of Water 

Resources, the State Water Project, the Federal Central Valley Project, local water districts 
or other authorities to pay the costs of expert staff members assigned to the Authority, as 
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Authority to accomplish its purposes. 

(f)  The Authority may contract with professionals, consultants and independent 

contractors for directly related project assignments, special expertise and other specialized 
work, as deemed necessary and appropriate by ~he Authority to accomplish its purposes. 

Article 3.  State Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Finance Committee 

79807. 

(a) Solely for the purpose of authorizing the issuance and sale pursuant to the State 

General Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720) of Part 3 of 
Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code) of the bonds authorized by this division, the 
State Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Finance Committee is hereby created. For 
purposes of this division, the State Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Finance 
Committee is the "committee" as that term is used in the State General Obligation Bond 
Law. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

14 

(b) The Committee consists of the Director of Finance, the Treasurer, and the 

Controller. Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, any member may designate a 
representative to act as that member in his or her place for all purposes, as though the 
member were personally present. 

(c) The Treasurer shall serve as chairperson of the committee. 

(d) A majority of the committee may act for the committee. 

Article 4.  Spending Requirements and Limitations 

79808. 

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division or Title, the Authority shall 
not make grants to other governmental agencies or pay for construction costs for projects 
funded pursuant to Section 79813 an amount  that exceeds SO  percent of the total costs of 
any project funded under this chapter. 

(b) Funds provided by this division shall not be expended to support or pay for the 
costs of environmental mitigation measures except as part of the environmental mitigation 
costs of projects financed by this division. Funds provided by this division may be used for 
environmental enhancements or other public benefits directly resulting from the uses 
established in Section 79802(b). 

79809. 

(a) Subject to the provisions of Section 79801(g) and 79802(e) and notwithstanding 

any other provision of law, the Authority shall make the determination that any projects 
authorized by this Division do not diminish, impair, or otherwise affect matters of public 
benefit or for the public trust, including but not limited to, any area of origin, watershed of 
origin, county of origin, or other water rights protections, including, but not limited to, 
rights to water appropriated prior to December 19, 1914, provided under the law; 
provided, however, that the Legislature may reject the findings of those sections only by a 
2/3ds roll call vote of the membership concurring; and the Legislature may not delegate to 
any other state agency the power to make such determinations with respect to the projects 
authorized by this Division. 

(b) Nothing in this division supersedes, limits, or otherwise modifies the 

applicability of Chapter 10 ( commencing with Section 1700) of Part 2 of Division 2, 
including petitions related to any new conveyance constructed or operated in accordance 
with Chapter 2 ( commencing with Section 85320) of Part 4 of Division 35. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

15 

(c)  Nothing in this division supersedes, limits, or otherwise modifies the 

Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Reform Act of 2009 (Division 35 (commencing with Section 
85000)). 

( d)  Eligible applicants under this division are public agencies, nonprofit 

organizations, public utilities, federally recognized Indian tribes, State Indian tribes listed 
on the Native American Heritage Commission's California Tribal list, and mutual water 
companies. To be eligible for funding under this division, a project proposed by a public 
utility that is regulated by the Public Utilities Commission or a mutual water company shall 
have a clear and definite public purpose and shall benefit the customers of the water 
system. 

( e) Projects funded pursuant to this division may use the services of the California 

Conservation Corps or certified community conservation corps, as defined in Section 
14507.5 of the Public Resources Code. 

Chapter 2.  Bond Authorization 

Article 1. 

79810. 

The uncontracted, unencumbered assets of issued bonds and unissued bonds, in the total 
amount not to exceed the amounts provided in subdivisions (a) and (b), as provided fully in 
Section 79750.5 of Division 26.7 of the Water Code and Section 2704.105 of Chapter 20 of 
Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code, shall be reallocated, appropriated, authorized, 
issued and sold for the purposes set forth in Section 79813. The bonds, when sold, shall be 
and constitute a valid and binding obligation of the State of California, and the full faith and 
credit of the State of California is hereby pledged for the punctual payment of the principal 
of, and interest on, the bonds as the principal and interest become due and payable. 

These shall include: 

(a) first, unissued bonds authorized by the High-Speed Passenger Train Bond Fund 
established by Proposition lA, the "Safe, Reliable High-Speed Passenger Train Bond Act For 
The 21st Century," adopted by the voters on November  4, 2008, as reallocated by Section 
2704.105 of Chapter 20 (commencing with Section 2704) of Division 3 of the Streets and 
Highways Code herein;. and, 

(b) second, unissued bonds authorized by the Water Quality, Supply, and Infrastructure 
Improvement Fund of 2014 established by Proposition 1, the "Water Quality, Supply, and 
Infrastructure Improvement Act of 2014," adopted by the voters on November 4, 2014, in 
the amount of two billion seven hundred million ($2,700,000,000) of funds allocated for 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

16 

statewide water system operational improvement by Chapter 8 of Division 26. 7 of the 
Water Code as established by Proposition 1, as reallocated by Section 79750.5. 

Article 2.  State Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund. 

79811. 

The uncontracted, unencumbered assets of issued bonds reallocated pursuant to this 
chapter, together with the proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, and 
any additional funds appropriated by the Legislature or proceeds of other bonds issued and 
sold for uses compliant with the uses permissible under this chapter, shall be deposited in 
the 2016 State Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund established in the 
State Treasury and shall be allocated by the State Allocation Board pursuant to this chapter. 

79812. 

All moneys deposited in the State Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund 
for the purposes of this chapter shall be available to provide funding as described in 
Section 79813,  to provide funds to repay any money advanced or loaned to the 2016 State 
New Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund under any act of the 
Legislature, together with interest provided for in that act, and to reimburse the General 
Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to Section 16724.5 of the Government 
Code. 

79813. 

(a) The proceeds from the sale of bonds issued and sold for the purposes of this 

chapter, shall be allocated in accordance with the following schedule: 

(1) 

The amount of four billion two hundred million dollars ($4,200,000,000) for 

new construction of surface water storage facilities. 

The  following  surface  water storage  projects  identified  by the  department in  the 
CALFED  Bay-Delta  Programmatic  Record  of Decision,  dated August 28,  2000, are eligible 
for funding pursuant to this chapter and subdivision: 

(A) Sites  Reservoir located in the Counties of Colusa and Glenn,  as identified in the 
North-of-the-Delta Offstream Storage Investigation Initial Alternatives Information Report, 
dated May 2006. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

17 

(B) Temperance  Flat  Reservoir  located  in  the  Counties  of Fresno  and  Madera,  as 
identified in  the  Upper San  Joaquin  River  Basin  Storage  Investigation  Initial Alternatives 
Information Report, dated June 2005. 

(2) 

The amount of nine hundred million dollars ($  900,000,000) for construction 

of surface water storage facilities to increase their storage capacity. 

The following surface water storage projects are eligible for funding pursuant to this 

chapter and subdivision: 

(A)  Expansion of the San Luis Reservoir located in the County of Merced. 

(B) Expansion of the storage capacity of Shasta Dam by up to 18.5  vertical feet in 
order to increase the overall storage capacity of Lake Shasta by up to 636,000 acre-feet. 

(3) 

The amount of two billion dollars ($2,000,000,000) for new construction of 

groundwater storage facilities to service and recharge existing groundwater aquifers. 

(4) 

The amount of two billion two hundred million dollars($ 2,200,000,000) for 

any other modernization of existing surface and groundwater storage facilities. 

(5)  Remaining unexpended proceeds of bonds after the completion of the projects 

identified and provided for in this section shall be reserved for future spending for public 
benefits resulting from construction of  local surface water and groundwater projects that 
are approved by the Authority herein, or for repayment of obligations of the New Surface 
Water Storage and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund as otherwise provided in this 
Division. 

(b) Any water deliveries or transfers or exchanges of water from facilities resulting 

from projects funded by the Authority pursuant to the Act shall only be made if their 
primary purpose for the beneficial uses and priorities established in Article X,  section 2.5 of 
the California Constitution. 

(c)  Funds allocated pursuant to Section 89513 (a)  (5) may also be utilized to 

provide sustainable groundwater management programs. 

( d) Chapter 4. 9 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code ( commencing with 
section 65995), as those provisions read on January 1, 2015, shall be in effect until the full 
amount of bonds authorized for new and modernized surface and groundwater storage 
facility construction and modernization pursuant to subdivision (a) (I)-( 4) have been 
expended, or December 31, 2030, whichever is sooner. Thereafter, Chapter 4.9 of Division I 
of Title 7 of the Government Code may be amended pursuant to law. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

18 

Article 3.  State Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fiscal Provisions 

79814. 

(a) Of the total amount of bonds authorized to be issued and sold pursuant to 
Chapters 1 and 2 ( commencing with Section 79810), not including the amount of any 
refunding bonds issued in accordance with Section 79830, or so much thereof as is 
necessary, may be issued and sold to provide a fund to be used for carrying out the 
purposes expressed in this chapter and to reimburse the General Obligation Bond Expense 
Revolving Fund pursuant to Section 16724.5 of the Government Code. 

(b) Pursuant to this section, the Treasurer shall sell the bonds authorized by the 

State Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Committee established pursuant to 
Section 79815 at any different times necessary to service expenditures required by the 
apportionments. 

79815.  Audits. 

(a) The California State Auditor shall annually conduct a programmatic review and 

an audit of expenditures from the fund. 

(b) Notwithstanding Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, the California State 

Auditor shall report its findings annually on or before March 1 to the Governor and the 
Legislature, and shall make the findings available to the public. 

( c) If an audit, required by statute, of any entity that receives funding authorized by 
this division is conducted pursuant to state law and reveals any impropriety, the California 
State Auditor or the Controller may conduct a full audit of any or all of the activities of that 
entity. 

( d) The state agency issuing any grant or loan with funding authorized by this 

division shall require adequate reporting of the expenditures of the funding from the grant 
or loan. 

79816. 

(a) Except as provided in subdivision (c), no funds allocated pursuant to this chapter 

may be allocated for a project before December 15, 2018, and until the Committee 
approves the project based on the Committee's determination that all of the following have 
occurred: (1) The Authority has adopted the regulations specified in Section 79805(1) and 
specifically quantified and made public the cost of the public benefits associated with the 
project. (2) The project applicant has entered into a contract with each party that will 
derive benefits, other than public benefits, as defined in Section 79805(1), from the project 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

19 

that ensures the party will pay its share of the total costs of the project. The benefits 
available to a party shall be consistent with that party's share of total project costs. (3) The 
project applicant has entered into a contract with each public agency identified in Section 
79805(1) that administers the public benefits, after that agency makes a finding that the 
public benefits of the project for which that agency is responsible meet all the 
requirements of this chapter, to ensure that the public contribution of funds pursuant to 
this chapter achieves the public benefits identified for the project. ( 4) The Authority has 
held a public hearing for the purposes of providing an opportunity for the public to review 
and comment on the information required to be prepared pursuant to this subdivision. (5) 
All of the following additional conditions are met: (A)  Feasibility studies have been 
completed. (B)  The Authority has found and determined that the project is feasible and is 
consistent with all applicable laws and regulations, and will advance the long-term 
objectives set forth in Sections 89801 and 89802.  (C) All environmental documentation 
associated with the project has been completed, and all other federal, state, and local 
approvals, certifications, and agreements required to be completed have been obtained. 

(b) The Authority shall submit to the Legislature its findings for each of the criteria 

identified in subdivision (a) for a project funded pursuant to this chapter. 

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), funds may be made available under this 

chapter for the completion of environmental documentation and permitting of a project 
that the Authority has determined would qualify for approval subject to meeting all of the 
other requirements of subdivision (a) except subdivision (a) (5) (C). 

79817. 

(a) A project is not eligible for funding under this chapter unless, by January 1, 2022, 

all of the following conditions are met: (1) All feasibility studies are complete and draft 
environmental documentation is available for public review;  (2) The Authority makes a 
finding that the project is feasible and will advance the long-term objectives set forth in 
Sections 89801 and 89802; and (3) The Authority receives commitments for not less than 
SO  percent of the nonpublic benefit cost share of the project. 

(b) If compliance with subdivision (a) is delayed by litigation or failure to 

promulgate regulations, the date in subdivision (a) and in Section 79813(a) shall be 
extended by the committee for a time period that is equal to the time period of the delay, 
and funding under this chapter that has been dedicated to the project shall be encumbered 
until the time at which the litigation is completed or the regulations have been 
promulgated. 

79818. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

20 

Surface water storage projects funded pursuant to this Division and described in 
subdivision (a)  of Section 79813 may be made a unit of the Central Valley Project as 
provided in Section 11290 and may be financed, acquired, constructed, operated, and 
maintained pursuant to Part 3 ( commencing with Section 11100) of Division 6. 

79819. 

(a) The funds allocated for the design, acquisition, and construction of surface water 

storage projects identified in Section 79813, in the CALFED Bay-Delta Record of Decision, 
dated August 28, 2000, pursuant to this chapter may be provided for those purposes to 
local joint powers authorities formed by irrigation districts and other local water districts 
and local governments within the applicable hydrologic region to design, acquire, and 
construct those projects. 

(b) The joint powers authorities described in subdivision (a) may include in their 

membership governmental partners that are not located within their respective hydrologic 
regions in financing the surface water storage projects, including, as appropriate, cost 
share participation or equity participation. Notwithstanding Section 6525 of the 
Government Code, the joint powers agencies described in subdivision (a) shall not include 
in their membership any for-profit corporation or any mutual water company whose 
shareholders and members include a for-profit corporation or any other private entity. The 
department shall be an ex officio member of each joint powers authority subject to this 
section, but the department shall not control the governance, management, or operation of 
the surface water storage projects. 

(c) A joint powers authority subject to this section shall own, govern, manage, and 

operate a surface water storage project, subject to the requirement that the ownership, 
governance, management, and operation of the surface water storage project shall advance 
the purposes set forth in this chapter. 

Chapter  3.  General 

79820. 

(a) In approving the 2016 State Water Storage and Groundwater Storage Facilities 
Act, the people were informed and hereby declare that the provisions of this chapter are 
necessary, integral, and essential to meeting the single object or work of the Water Quality, 
Supply, and Infrastructure Improvement Act of 2014 and of this measure. As such, any 
amendment of the provisions of this chapter by the Legislature without voter approval 
would frustrate the scheme and design that induced voter approval of this measure. The 
people therefore find and declare that any amendment of the provisions of this chapter by 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

21 

the Legislature shall require an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the membership in each 
house of the Legislature and voter approval. 

(b) This section shall not govern or be used as authority for determining whether 

the amendment of any other provision of this act not contained in this chapter would 
constitute a substantial change in the scheme and design of this act requiring voter 
approval. 

79821. 

(a) The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be prepared, executed, issued, sold, 

paid, and redeemed as provided in the State General Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 
(commencing with Section 16720) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government 
Code), and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, are hereby 
incorporated into this chapter as though set forth in full within this chapter, except 
subdivisions (a) and (b) of section 16727 of the Government Code shall not apply to the 
bonds authorized by this chapter. 

(b) For purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law, the State Allocation 

Board is designated the "board" for purposes of administering the 2016 State New Surface 
Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund. 

79822. 

(a) Upon request of the State Allocation Board, the State New Surface Water and 
Groundwater Storage Facilities Finance Committee shall determine whether or not it is 
necessary or desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this chapter in order to fund 
the related apportionments and, if so, the amount of bonds to be issued and sold. 
Successive issues of bonds may be authorized and sold to fund those apportionments 
progressively, and it is not necessary that all of the bonds authorized to be issued be sold at 
any one time.  

(b) A request of the State Allocation Board pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be 

supported by a statement of the apportionments made and to be made for the purposes 
described in Sections 79814 and 79823. There shall be collected each year and in the same 
manner and at the same time as other state revenue is collected, in addition to the ordinary 
revenues of the state, a sum in an amount required to pay the principal of, and interest on, 
the bonds each year. It is the duty of all officers charged by law with any duty in regard to 
the collection of the revenue to do and perform each and every act that is necessary to 
collect that additional sum. 

79823. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

22 

Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, there is hereby appropriated 
from the General Fund in the State Treasury, for the purposes of this chapter, an amount 
that will equal the total of the following: (a) The sum annually necessary to pay the 
principal of, and interest on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, as the 
principal and interest become due and payable. (b) The sum necessary to carry out Section 
79826, appropriated without regard to fiscal years. 

79824. 

The State Allocation Board may request the Pooled Money Investment Board to make a 
loan from the Pooled Money Investment Account or any other approved form of interim 
financing, in accordance with Section 16312 of the Government Code, for the purpose of 
carrying out this chapter. The amount of the request shall not exceed the amount of the 
unsold bonds ( exclusive of refunding bonds) that the committee, by resolution, has 
authorized to be sold for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. The board shall execute 
any documents required by the Pooled Money Investment Board to obtain and repay the 
loan. Any amounts loaned shall be deposited in the fund to be allocated by the board in 
accordance with this chapter. 

79825. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or of the State General Obligation 
Bond Law, if the Treasurer sells bonds pursuant to this chapter that include a bond counsel 
opinion to the effect that the interest on the bonds is excluded from gross income for 
federal tax purposes, subject to designated conditions, the Treasurer may maintain 
separate accounts for the investment of bond proceeds and for the investment earnings on 
those proceeds. The Treasurer may use or direct the use of those proceeds or earnings to 
pay any rebate, penalty, or other payment required under federal law or take any other 
action with respect to the investment and use of those bond proceeds required or desirable 
under federal law to maintain the tax-exempt status of those bonds and to obtain any other 
advantage under federal law on behalf of the funds of this state. 

79826. 

For the purposes of carrying out this chapter, the Director of Finance may authorize the 
withdrawal from the General Fund of an amount not to exceed the amount of the unsold 
bonds ( exclusive of refunding bonds) that have been authorized by the State New Surface 
Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Finance Committee to be sold for the purpose of 
carrying out this chapter. Any amounts withdrawn shall be deposited in the 2016 State 
New Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities Fund consistent with this chapter. 
Any money made available under this section shall be returned to the General Fund, plus an 
amount equal to the interest that the money would have earned in the Pooled Money 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

23 

Investment Account, from proceeds received from the sale of bonds for the purpose of 
carrying out this chapter. 

79827. 

All money deposited in the 2016 State Surface Water and Groundwater Storage Facilities 
Fund, that is derived from premium and accrued interest on bonds sold shall be reserved in 
the fund and shall be available for transfer to the General Fund as a credit to expenditures 
for bond interest, except that amounts derived from premium may be reserved and used to 
pay the cost of the bond issuance prior to any transfer to the General Fund. 

79828. 

The bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter may be refunded in accordance with 
Article 6 ( commencing with Section 16 780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of 
the Government Code, which is a part of the State General Obligation Bond Law. Approval 
by the voters of the state for the issuance of the bonds described in this chapter includes 
the approval of the issuance of any bonds issued to refund any bonds originally issued 
under this chapter or any previously issued refunding bonds. Any bond refunded with the 
proceeds of refunding bonds as authorized by this section may be legally defeased to the 
extent permitted by law in the manner and to the extent set forth in the resolution, as 
amended from time to time, authorizing such refunded bond. 

79829. 

The people hereby find and declare that, inasmuch as the proceeds from the sale of bonds 
authorized by this chapter are not "proceeds of taxes" as that term is used in Article XIII B 
of the California Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the 
limitations imposed by that article. 

SECTION 3.  GENERAL PROVISIONS 

(a) If any provision of this measure, or part thereof, is for any reason held to be 

invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain 
in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure are severable. 

(b) This measure is intended to be comprehensive. It is the intent of the People that 

in the event this measure or measures relating to the same subject shall appear on the 
same statewide election ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall be 
deemed to be in conflict with this measure. In the event that this measure receives a 
greater number of affirmative votes, the provisions of this measure shall prevail in their 
entirety, and all provisions of the other measure or measures shall be null and void. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

24 

( c) The People of the State of California declare that the proponent of this Act has a 

direct and personal stake in defending this measure and grant formal authority to the 
proponent to defend this measure in any legal proceeding, either by intervening in such 
legal proceeding, or by defending the measure on behalf of the people and the State in the 
event that the State declines to defend the measure or declines to appeal an adverse 
judgment against the measure. 

In the event that the proponent is defending this measure in a legal proceeding because the 
State has declined to defend it or to appeal an adverse judgment against it, the proponent 
shall: act as an agent of the people and the State; be subject to all ethical, legal, and 
fiduciary duties applicable to such parties in such legal proceedings; take and be subject to 
the Oath of Office prescribed by Article XX, section 3 of the California Constitution for the 
limited purpose of acting on behalf of the people and the State in such legal proceeding; and 
be entitled to recover reasonable legal fees and related costs from the State. 

AG  15-0107  12/14/15  V.  2 

25 

