REMCHO, JOHANSEN & PURCELL, LLP 

ATTORNEYS AT LAW 

1 5  - o 1 2  1  Arndt.#  I 

201  DOLORES A VENUE 
SAN LEANDRO, CA  94577 
PHONE: (510) 346-6200 
FAX: (510) 346-6201 
EMAIL: mprinzing@rjp.com 
WEBSITE: www.rjp.com 

SACRAMENTO PHONE: (916) 264-1818 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Robin B.  Johansen 
James C.  Harrison
Thomas A  Willis
Karen Getman 
Margaret R.  Prinzing
Andrew Harris W erbrock 
Harry A  Berezin 
Juan Carlos Ibarra 

Joseph Remcho (1944-2003) 
Kathleen J.  Purcell (Ret.) 

January 25, 2016 

RECEIVED 

JAN  2 6 2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATIORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 	

Submission ofAmendment to Statewide Initiative Measure ­
The Justice and Rehabilitation Act,  No.  15-0121 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

As you know, I am one of the proponents of the proposed statewide initiative, 
"The Justice and Rehabilitation Act," No.  15-0121.  I am enclosing the following documents: 

The amended text of "The Justice and Rehabilitation Act," No.  15-0121; 

•  A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended text; and 

Signed authorizations from each of the proponents for the submission of the 
amended text together with their requests that the Attorney General's Office 
prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this proposed 

initiative as indicated below: 

	
Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
January 25, 2016 
Page2 

Smart on Crime 
c/o James C.  Harrison 
Margaret R.  Prinzing 
Harry A.  Berezin 
Remcho, Johansen & Purcell, LLP 
201  Dolores A venue 
San Leandro, CA  94577 
Phone:  (510) 346-6200 
Fax:  (510) 346-6201 

Thank you for your time and attention to this matter. 

MRP:NL 

Enclosures 

(00266157) 

January 25, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA  95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 	

Submission ofAmendment to  The Justice and Rehabilitation Act,  No.  15-0121,  and 
Request to Prepare Circulating Title  and Summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 22, 2015, I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The Justice 

and Rehabilitation Act," No.  15-0121, and submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary pursuant to section 10( d) of Article II of the California Constitution. 

Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), I hereby submit timely amendments to 

the title and text of the Initiative.  As one of the proponents of the initiative, I approve the 
submission of the amended text to the initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably 
germane to the theme, purpose, or subject of the initiative measure as originally proposed.  I request 
that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended language. 

Sincerely, 

Enclosures 
(00266162) 

January 25, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA  95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 	

Submission ofAmendment to  The Justice and Rehabilitation Act,  No.  15-0121,  and 
Request to Prepare Circulating Title  and Summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 22, 2015, I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The Justice 

and Rehabilitation Act," No.  15-0121, and submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary pursuant to section 10( d) of Article II of the California Constitution. 

Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), I hereby submit timely amendments to 

the title and text of the Initiative.  As one of the proponents of the initiative, I approve the 
submission of the amended text to the initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably 
germane to the theme, purpose, or subject of the initiative measure as originally proposed.  I request 
that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended language. 

Sincerely, 

Harry Berezin 

Enclosures 
(00266171) 

1 5  - o 1 2  1  Arndt.# 1 

Amdt. #1 

THE PUBLIC SAFETY AND REHABILITATION ACT OF 2016 

SECTION 1.  Title. 

This measure shall be known and may be cited as "The Public Safety and Rehabilitation Act of 
2016." 

SEC. 2.  Purpose and Intent. 

In enacting this Act, it is the purpose and intent of the people ofthe State of California to: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Protect and enhance public safety. 

Save money by reducing wasteful spending on prisons. 

Prevent federal courts from indiscriminately releasing prisoners. 

Stop the revolving door of crime by emphasizing rehabilitation, especially for juveniles. 

Require a judge, not a prosecutor, to decide whether juveniles should be tried in adult 

5. 
court. 
SEC. 3.  Section 32 is added to Article I of the California Constitution, to read: 

SEC. 32. (a) The following provisions are hereby enacted to enhance public safety,  improve 
rehabilitation, and avoid the release of prisoners by federal court order, notwithstanding anything 
in this article or any other provision of law: 

(1) Parole consideration: Any person convicted of a non-violent felony offense and sentenced to 
state prison shall be eligible for parole consideration after completing the full term for his or her 
primary offense. 

(A) For purposes ofthis section only, the full term for the primary offense means the longest 
term of imprisonment imposed by the court for any offense, excluding the imposition of an 
enhancement, consecutive sentence, or alternative sentence. 

(2) Credit Earning: The Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall have authority to 
award credits earned for good behavior and approved rehabilitative or educational achievements. 

(b) The Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall adopt regulations in furtherance of 
these provisions, and the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall 
certify that these regulations protect and enhance public safety. 

SEC. 4.  Judicial Transfer Process. 

Sections 602 and 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code are hereby amended. 

Section 602 ofthe Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read: 

Except as provided in subdivision (b) Section 707, any person who is under 18 years of 
602. 
age when he or she violates any law of this state or ofthe United States or any ordinance of any 
city or county of this state defining crime other than an ordinance establishing a curfew based 

1 


solely on age, is within the jurisdiction of the juvenile court, which may adjudge such person to 
be a ward of the court. 

Amdt. #1 

(b) Any person 
one of the following  offenses shall be prosecuted under the general law  in a court of criminal 
jurisdiction: 

is alleged, when he or she was 14  years of 

or older, to have committed 

(1) Murder, as described in Section 187 of the Penal Code, if one of the circumstances 
enumerated in subdivision (a) of Section 190.2 of the Penal Code is alleged by the prosecutor, 
and the prosecutor alleges that the minor personally killed the victim. 

(2) The following  sex offenses, if the prosecutor alleges that the minor personally committed the 
offense, and if the prosecutor alleges one of the circumstances enumerated in the One Strike law, 
subdivision (d) or (e) of Section 667.61  of the Penal Code, applies: 

(A) Rape,  as described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 261  of the Penal Code. 

(B) Spousal rape, as described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 262 of the Penal 
Code. 

(C) Forcible sex offenses in concert with another, as described in Section 264.1  of the Penal 
Code. 

. 

(D) Forcible lewd and lascivious acts on a child under 14  years of age, as described in 
subdivision (b) of Section 288 of the Penal Code. 

(E) Forcible sexual penetration, as described in subdivision (a) of Section 289 of the Penal Code. 

(F) Sodomy or oral copulation in violation of Section 286 or 288a of the Penal Code, by force, 
violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlav.rful bodily injury on the victim or 
another person. 

(G) Lewd and lascivious acts on a child under 14  years of age, as defined in subdivision (a) of 
Section 288, unless the defendant qualifies for probation under subdivision (d) of Section 
1203.066 of the Penal Code. 

Section 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read: 

707. (a)(l) In any case in which a minor is alleged to be a person described in subdivision (a) of 
Section 602 by reason of the violation, when he or she was 16 years of age or older, of any 
felony criminal statute,  or ordinance except those listed in subdivision (b), or of an offense listed 
in subdivision (b) when he or she was 14 or 15  years of age, the District Attorney or other 
appropriate prosecuting officer may make a motion to transfer the minor from juvenile court to a 
court of criminal jurisdiction. upon The motion of the petitioner must be made prior to the 
attachment ofjeopardy.  Upon such motion, the juvenile court shall cause order the probation 
officer to investigate and submit a report on the behavioral patterns and social history of the 
minor.  being considered for a determination of unfitness. The report shall include any written or 
oral statement offered by the victim pursuant to Section 656.2. 

2 


Amdt.#1 

(2)Following submission and consideration of the report,  and of any other relevant evidence that 
the petitioner or the minor may wish to submit, the juvenile court shall decide whether the minor 
should be transferred to a court of criminal jurisdiction.  In making its decision, the court shall 
consider the criteria specified in subparagraphs (A) to (E) below.  Ifthe court orders a transfer of 
jurisdiction, the court shall recite the basis for its decision in an order entered upon the minutes. 
In any case in which a hearing has been noticed pursuant to this section, the court shall postpone 
the taking of a plea to the petition until the conclusion of the transfer hearing, and no plea that 
may have been entered already shall constitute evidence at the hearing. may find that the minor 
is not a fit and proper subject to be dealt with under the juvenile court law  if it concludes that the 
minor w:ould not be amenable to the care, treatment, and training program available through the 
facilities of the juvenile court, based upon an evaluation of the criteria specified in clause (i) of 
subparagraphs  (A)  to (E), inclusive: 

(A)(i) The degree of criminal sophistication exhibited by the minor. 

(ii) When evaluating the criterion specified in clause (i), the juvenile court may give weight to 
any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the minor's age, maturity, intellectual capacity, 
and physical, mental, and emotional health at the time of the alleged offense, the minor's 
impetuosity or failure to appreciate risks and consequences of criminal behavior, the effect of 
familial, adult, or peer pressure on the minor's actions, and the effect of the minor's family and 
community environment and childhood trauma on the minor's criminal sophistication. 

(B)(i) Whether the minor can be rehabilitated prior to the expiration of the juvenile court's 
jurisdiction. 

(ii) When evaluating the criterion specified in clause (i), the juvenile court may give weight to 
any relevant factor,  including, but not limited to, the minor's potential to grow and mature. 

(C)(i) The minor's previous delinquent history. 

(ii) When evaluating the criterion specified in clause (i), the juvenile court may give weight to 
any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the seriousness of the minor's previous 
delinquent history and the effect of the minor's family and community environment and 
childhood trauma on the minor's previous delinquent behavior. 

(D)(i) Success of previous attempts by the juvenile court to rehabilitate the minor. 

(ii) When evaluating the criterion specified in clause (i), the juvenile court may give weight to 
any relevant factor, including, but not limited to,  the adequacy of the services previously 
provided to address the minor's needs. 

(E)(i) The circumstances and gravity of the offense alleged in the petition to have been 
committed by the minor. 

(ii) When evaluating the criterion specified in clause (i), the juvenile court may give weight to 
any relevant factor, including but not limited to, the actual behavior of the person, the mental 
state of the person, the person's degree of involvement in the crime, the level of harm actually 
caused by the person, and the person's mental and emotional development. 

3 

Arndt. #1 

A determination that the minor is not a fit and proper subject to be dealt with under the juvenile 
court law may be based on any one or a combination of the factors set forth above in clause (i) of 
subparagraphs (A)  to  (E), inclusive, which shall be recited in the order of unfitness. In any case 
in which a hearing has been noticed pursuant to this section, the court shall postpone the taking 
of a plea to the petition until the conclusion of the fitness hearing,  and no plea that may have 
been entered already shall constitute evidence at the hearing. 

(2)(A) This paragraph shall apply to a minor alleged to be a person described in Section 602 by 
reason of the violation, when  he or she has attained 16 years of age, of any felony offense when 
the minor has been declared to be a ward of the court pursuant to Section 602 on one or more 
prior occasions if both of the follmving apply: 

(i) The minor has previously been found to have committed two  or more felony offenses. 

(ii) The offenses upon whieh  the prior petition or petitions were based were  committed when  the 
minor had attained 14  years of age. 

(B) Upon motion of the petitioner made prior to the attachment ofjeopardy the court shall cause 
the probation officer to investigate and submit a report on the behavioral patterns and social 
history of the minor being considered for a determination of unfitness. Following submission and 
consideration of the report, and of any other relevant evidence that the petitioner or the minor 
may wish  to submit, the minor shall be presumed to be not a fit and proper subject to be dealt 
with under the juvenile court law unless the juvenile court concludes, based upon evidence, 
which  evidence may be of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, that the minor wou1d  be 
amenable to the care, treatment, and trainmg program available through the facilities of the 
juvenile court based upon an evaluation of the criteria specified in subclause (I) of clauses (i) to 
(v), inclusive: 

(i)(I) The degree of criminal sophistication exhibited by the minor. 

(II) When evaluating the criterion specified in subclause (I), the juvenile court may give weight 
to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the minor's age, maturity, intellectual 
capacity, and physical, mental, and emotional health at the time of the alleged offense, the 
minor's impetuosity or failure to appreciate risks and consequences of criminal behavior, the 
effect of familial, adult, or peer pressure on the minor's actions, and the effect of the minor's 
family and community environment and childhood trauma on the minor's criminal 
sophistication. 

(ii)(I) Whether the minor can be rehabilitated prior to the expiration ofthe juvenile court's 
jurisdiction. 

(II) When evaluating the criterion specified in subclause (I), the juvenile court may give weight 
to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the minor's potential to grow and mature. 

(iii)(I) The minor's previous delinquent history. 

(II) When evaluating the criterion specified in subclause (I), the juvenile court may give weight 
to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the seriousness of the minor's previous 

4 


Arndt. #1 

delinquent history  and the effect of the minor's family and community  environment and 
childhood trauma on the minor's previous delinquent behavior. 

(iv)(I) Success ofprevious attempts by the juvenile court to rehabilitate the minor. 

(II) When evaluating the criterion specified in subelause (I), the juvenile court may giveweight 
to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the adequacy of the services prevriously 
provided to address the minor's needs. 

(v)(I) The circumstances and gravity of the offense alleged in the petition to have been 
committed by the minor. 

(II) When evaluating the criterion specified in subclause (I), the juvenile court may give weight 
to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the actual behavior of the person, the mental 
state  of the person, the person's degree of involvement in the crime, the level  of harm actually 
caused by the person, and the person's mental and emotional development. 

A  determination that the minor is a fit and proper subject to  be dealt with under the juvenile court 
law  shall be based on a finding of amenability after consideration of the criteria set forth in 
subclause (I) of clauses (i) to (v), inclusive, and findings therefore recited in the order as to each 
of the those criteria that the minor is fit and proper under each and every one ofthose criteria. In 
making a finding of fitness, the court may consider extenuating and mitigating circumstances  in 
evaluating each of those criteria. In any case in which the hearing has been noticed pursuant to 
this section, the court shall postpone  the taking of a plea to the petition until the conclusion of the 
fitness hearing and no plea that may have been entered already shall constitute evidence  at the 
hearing. Ifthe minor is found to be a fit and proper subject to be dealt with 
under the juvenile 
court law pursuant to this subdivision,  the minor shall be committed to placement in a juvenile 
hall, ranch camp, forestry camp, boot camp, or secure juvenile home pursuant to  Section 730, or 
in any institution  operated by the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Division of 
Juvenile Facilities. 

(3) If, pursuant to this subdivision, the minor is found to  be not a fit and proper subject for 
juvenile court treatment and is tried in a court of criminal jurisdiction and found guilty by the 
trier of fact, the judge may commit the minor to the Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation, Division of Juvenile Facilities, in lieu of sentencing the minor to the state prison, 
unless the limitations specified in Section 1732.6 apply. 

(b) Subdivision (c)  (a)  shall be applicable in any case in which a minor is alleged to be a person 
described in Section 602 by reason ofthe violation of one of the following offenses when he or 
she was  14 or 15 years of age: 

(1) Murder. 

(2) Arson, as provided in subdivision ( a) or (b) of Section 451  ofthe Penal Code. 

(3) Robbery. 

(4) Rape with force,  violence, or threat of great bodily harm. 

5 


Arndt. #1 

(5) Sodomy by force, violence, duress, menace, or threat of great bodily harm. 

(6) A lewd or lascivious act as provided in subdivision (b) of Section 288 of the Penal Code. 

(7) Oral copulation by force, violence, duress, menace, or threat of great bodily harm. 

(8) An offense specified in subdivision (a) of Section 289 of the Penal Code. 

(9) Kidnapping for ransom. 

(10) Kidnapping for purposes ofrobbery. 

(11) Kidnapping with bodily harm. 

(12) Attempted murder. 

(13) Assault with a firearm or destructive device. 

(14) Assault by any means of force likely to produce great bodily injury. 

(15) Discharge of a firearm into an inhabited or occupied building. 

(16) An offense described in Section 1203.09 of the Penal Code. 

(17) An offense described in Section 12022.5 or 12022.53 of the Penal Code. 

(18) A felony offense in which the minor personally used a weapon described in any provision 
listed in Section 16590 of the Penal Code. 

(19) A felony offense described in Section 136.1  or 137 of the Penal Code. 

(20) Manufacturing, compounding, or selling one-half ounce or more of a salt or solution of a 
controlled substance specified in subdivision ( e) of Section 11055 of the Health and Safety Code. 

(21) A violent felony, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 ofthe Penal Code, which 
also would constitute a felony violation of subdivision (b) of Section 186.22 of the Penal Code. 

(22) Escape, by the use of force or violence, from a county juvenile hall, home, ranch, camp, or 
forestry camp in violation of subdivision (b) of Section 871  if great bodily injury is intentionally 
inflicted upon an employee of the juvenile facility during the commission of the escape. 

(23) Torture as described in Sections 206 and 206.l of the Penal Code. 

(24) Aggravated mayhem, as described in Section 205 of the Penal Code. 

(25) Carjacking, as described in Section 215 of the Penal Code, while armed with a dangerous or 
deadly weapon. 

6 


Amdt. #1 

(26) Kidnapping for purposes of sexual assault, as punishable in subdivision (b) of Section 209 
of the Penal Code. 

(27) Kidnapping as punishable in Section 209.5 of the Penal Code. 

(28) The offense described in subdivision ( c) of Section 26100 ofthe Penal Code. 

(29) The offense described in Section 18745 of the Penal Code. 

(30) Voluntary manslaughter, as described in subdivision (a) of Section 192 ofthe Penal Code. 

(c) With regard to a minor alleged to be a person described in Section 602 by reason of the 
violation, When he or she was  14  years of age or older, of any of the offenses listed in 
subdivision (b), upon motion of the petitioner made prior to the attachment ofjeopardy the court 
shall cause the probation officer to imrestigate and submit a report on the behavioral patterns and 
social history of the minor being considered for a determination of unfitness. Following 
submission and consideration ofthe report, and of any other relevant evidence that the petitioner 
or the minor may wish  to submit, the minor shall be presumed to be not a fit and proper subject 
to be dealt with  under the juvenile court law  unless the juvenile court concludes, based upon 
evidence, which  evidence may be of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, that the minor 
would be amenable to the care, treatment, and training program available through the facilities of 
the juvenile court based upon an e11aluation of each ofthe following criteria specified in 
subparagraph (A.)  of paragraphs (1) to (5), inclusive: 

(l)(A) The degree of criminal sophistication exhibited by the minor. 

(B) When evaluating the criterion specified in subparagraph (A),  the juvenile court may give 
weight  to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the minor's age, maturity, intellectual 
capacity, and physical, mental, and emotional health at the time ofthe alleged offense, the 
minor's impetuosity or failure to appreciate risks and consequences of criminal behavior, the 
effect of familial, adult, or peer pressure on the minor's actions, and the effect ofthe minor's 
family and community environment and childhood trauma on the minor's criminal 
sophistication. 

(2)(A.) Whether the minor can be rehabilitated prior to the expiration of the juvenile court's 
jurisdiction. 

(B) When evaluating the criterion specified in subparagraph (A), the juvenile court may give 
weight  to any relevant  factor, including, but not limited to, the minor's potential to grow  and 
mature. 

(3)(A.) The minor's previous delinquent history. 

(B) When evaluating the criterion specified in subparagraph (A.), the juvenile court may give 
weight  to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the seriousness ofthe minor's 
previous delinquent history and the effect of the minor's family and community environment and 
childhood trauma on the minor's previous delinquent behavior. 

7 


Amdt. #1 

(4)(A)  Success of previous attempts by the juvenile court to rehabilitate the minor. 

(B) When evaluating the criterion specified in subparagraph (A),), the juvenile court may give 

weight 

to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the adequacy of the services 

preYiously provided to address the minor's needs. 

(5)(A) The circumstances and gravity  ofthe offenses alleged in the petition to have been 
committed by the minor. 

(B) When evaluating the criterion specified in subparagraph (A), the juvenile court may give 
weight to any relevant factor, including, but not limited to, the actual behavior of the person, the 
mental state of the person, the person's degree of involvement in the crime, the level of harm 
actually caused by the person, and the person's mental and emotional development. 

A determination that the minor is a fit and proper subject to be dealt with  under the juvenile court 
law  shall be based on a finding of amenability after consideration of the criteria set forth in 
subparagraph (A) ofparagraphs (1) to (5), inclusive, and findings therefore recited in the order as 
to each ofthose criteria that the minor is fit and proper under each and every one of those 
criteria. In making a finding of fitness, the court may consider extenuating or mitigating 
circumstances in evaluating each of those criteria. In any case in which a hearing has been 
noticed pursuant to this section, the court shall postpone the taking of a plea to the petition until 
the conclusion of the fitness hearing and no plea which may have  been entered already shall 
constitute evidence at the hearing. If, pursuant to this subdivision, the minor is found to be not a 
fit and proper subject for juvenile court treatment and is tried in a court of criminal jurisdiction 
and found guilty by the trier of fact, the judge may commit the minor to the Department of 
Corrections and Rehabilitation, DiYision of Juvenile Facilities, in lieu of sentencing the minor to 
the state prison, unless the limitations specified in Section 1732.6 apply. 

(d) (1) Except as provided in subdivision (b) of Section 602, the district attorney or other 
appropriate prosecuting officer may file an accusatory pleading in a court of criminal jurisdiction 
against any minor 16 years of age or older who  is accused of committing an offense enumerated 
in subdivision (b). 

(2) Except as provided in subdivision (b) of Section 602, the district attorney or other appropriate 
prosecuting officer may file an accusatory pleading against a minor 14  years of age or older in a 
court of criminal jurisdiction in any ease in whieh  any one or more of the following 
circumstances apply: 

(A)  The minor is alleged to have committed an offense that if committed by an adult would  be 
punishable by death or imprisonment in the state prison for life. 

(B) The minor is alleged to have  personally used a firearm during the commission or attempted 
commissioa of a felony, as described in Section 12022.5 or 12022.53 ofthe Penal Code. 

(C) The minor is alleged to have committed an offense listed in subdivision (b) in which any one 
or more of the following circumstances apply: 

8 


Arndt. #1 

(i) The minor has previously been found to be a person described in Section 602 by reason of the 
commission of an offense listed in subdivision (b). 

(ii) The offense was committed for the benefit of,  at the direction of,  or in association with any 
criminal street gang, as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 186.22 of the Penal Code, with the 
specific intent to promote, further, or assist in criminal conduct by gang members. 

(iii) The offense was  committed for the purpose of intimidating or interfering with any other 
person's free exercise or enjoyment of a right secured to him or her by the Constitution or laws of 
this state or by the Constitution or laws  of the United States and because of the other person's 
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, disability, gender, or sexual orientation, or because 
the minor perceives that the other person has one or more of those characteristics, as described in 
Title 11.6 (commencing with Section 422.55) of Part 1 of the Penal Code. 

(iv) The victim of the offense was 65  years of age or older, or blind, deaf, quadriplegic, 
paraplegic, developmentally disabled, or confined to a wheelchair, and that disability was known 
or reasonably should have been known to the minor at the time of the commission of the offense. 

(3) Except as provided in subdivision (b)  of Section 602, the district attorney or other appropriate 
prosecuting officer may file an accusatory pleading in a court of criminal jurisdiction against any 
minor 16 years of age or older who is accused of committing one or more of the following 
offenses, if the minor has previously been found to be a person described in Section 602 by 
reason of the violation of a felony offense, when 

he or she was 14  years of age or older: 

(A) A  felony offense in which it is alleged that the victim of the offense was  65 years of age or 
older, or blind, deaf, quadriplegic, paraplegic, developmentally disabled, or confined to a 
wheelchair, and that disability was known or reasonably should have been known to the minor at 
the time of the commission of the offense. 

(B) A  felony offense committed for the purposes of intimidating or interfering with any other 
person's free exercise or enjoyment of a right secured to  him or her by the Constitution or laws  of 
this state or by the Constitution or laws of the United States and because of the other person's 
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, disability, gender, or sexual orientation, or because 
the minor perceived that the other person had one or more of those characteristics, as  described 
in Title 11.6 (commencing with Section 422.55) of Part 1 of the Penal Code. 

(C) The offense was committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with any 
criminal street gang as prohibited by Section 186.22 of the Penal Code. 

(4) In any case in which the district attorney or other appropriate prosecuting officer has filed an 
accusatory pleading against a minor in a court of criminal jurisdiction pursuant to this 
subdivision, the ease shall then proceed according to the laws applicable to  a criminal case. In 
conjunction with  the preliminary hearing as provided in Section 738 of the Penal Code, the 
magistrate shall make a finding that reasonable cause exists to believe that the minor comes 
within this subdivision. If reasonable cause is not established, the criminal court shall transfer the 
case to the juvenile court having jurisdiction over the matter. 

9 


Arndt. #1 

(5) For an offense for which the prosecutor may file the accusatory pleading in a court of 
criminal jurisdiction pursuant to this subdiYision, but elects instead to file a petition in the 
juvenile  court, if the minor is subsequently found to be a person described in subdivision (a) of 
Section 602, the minor shall be committed to placement in a juvenile hall, ranch camp, forestry 
camp, boot camp, or secure juvenile home pursuant to  Section 730, or in any institution operated 
by the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Division of Juvenile Facilities. 

(6) If, pursuant to this subdivision, the minor is found to be not a fit and proper subject for 
juvenile  court treatment and is tried in a court of criminal jurisdiction and  found guilty by the 
trier of fact, the judge may commit the minor to the Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation, DiYision of Juvenile  Facilities, in lieu of sentencing the minor to the state prison, 
unless the limitations specified in Section 1732.6 apply. 

(e) A report submitted by a probation officer pursuant to this section regarding the behavioral 
patterns and social history of the minor being considered for a determination of unfitness shall 
include any written or oral statement offered by the victim,  the victim's parent or guardian if the 
victim is a minor, or if the victim has died, the victim's  next of kin, as authoriized by subdivision 
(b) of Section 656.2. Victims' statements shall be considered by the court to the extent they are 
relevant to the court's determination of unfitness. 

SEC. 5.  Amendment. 

This Act shall be broadly construed to accomplish its purposes.  The provisions of Section 4 of 
this measure may be amended so long as such amendments are consistent with and further the 
intent of this Act by a statute that is passed by a majority vote of the members of each house of 
the Legislature and signed by the Governor. 

SEC. 6.  Severability. 

If any provision of this measure, or part of this measure, or the application of any provision or 
part to any person or circumstances, is for any reason held to be invalid, the remaining 
provisions, or applications of provisions, shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and 
effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure are severable. 

SEC. 7.  Conflicting Initiatives. 

(a) In the event that this measure and another measure addressing credits and parole eligibility 
for state prisoners or adult court prosecution for juvenile defendants shall appear on the same 
statewide ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in 
conflict with this measure.  In the event that this measure receives a greater number of 
affirmative votes than a measure deemed to be in conflict with it, the provisions of this measure 
shall prevail in their entirety, and the other measure or measures shall be null and void. 

(b) Ifthis measure is approved by voters but superseded by law by any other conflicting measure 
approved by voters at the same election, and the conflicting ballot measure is later held invalid, 
this measure shall be self-executing and given full force and effect. 

10 


Arndt. #1 

SEC. 8.  Proponent Standing. 

Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the State, government agency, or any of its 
officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this act, following its approval by the voters, any 
other government employer, the proponent, or in their absence, any citizen of this State shall 
have the authority to intervene in any court action challenging the constitutionality of this act for 
the purpose of defending its constitutionality, whether such action is in any trial court, on appeal, 
or on discretionary review by the Supreme Court of California and/or the Supreme Court of the 
United States.  The reasonable fees and costs of defending the action shall be a charge on funds 
appropriated to the Department of Justice, which shall be satisfied promptly. 

SEC. 9.  Liberal Construction. 

This Act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. 

11 


