January 19, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

1 5  - o 1  1 6  Arndt.# I 

RECEIVED 

JAN  19  2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE

RE: 	 Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure 
The Californi.a Water Conservation, Flood and Stormwater 
Management Act of 2016, No. 15-0116 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

As you know, we serve as counsel for the proponents of the proposed 
statewide initiative, "The California Water Conservation, Flood Control and 
Stormwater Management Act of2016." The proponents ofthe proposed 
initiative are Christopher McKenzie, Tim Quinn, and Matthew Cate. On their 
behalf, we are enclosing the following documents: 

• 	 The amended text of "The California Water Conservation, Flood 

Control and Stormwater Management Act of 2016" 

• 	 A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended text 
• 	 Signed authorizations from each of the proponents for the 

submission of the amended text together with their requests that the 
Attorney General's Office prepare a circulating title and summary 
using the amended text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this 

proposed initiative to us at the address listed below: 

Lance H.  Olson &  Richard Miadich 

Olson, Hagel &  Fishburn LLP 

555 Capitol Mall, Suite 1425 

Sacramento, CA 95814 


Very truly yours, 

0@T2I~71f

RICHARD MIADICH 

RCM:LHO:EAA 


www.olsonhagel.com ~~ 

­
VIA MESSENGER 

January 15, 2016 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to  The California Water Conservation, Flood Control and 
Stormwater Management Act of 2016 (15-0116) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 14, 2015 I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The California Water 
Conservation, Flood Control and Stormwater Management Act of 2016"  ("Initiative") and a 
request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to section 
10(d) of Article II of the California Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ),  I 
hereby submit timely amendments to the text of the Initiative.  As a proponent of the Initiative, I 
approve the submission of the amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is 
reasonably germane to the theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative. I request that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Sincerely, 

VV\d. L:  c_t_ 

Matthew Cate 

Executive Director, California State Association of Counties 

VIA MESSENGER 

January 15, 2016 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to The California Water Conservation, Flood Control and 
Stormwater Management Act of 2016 (15-0116) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 14, 2015 I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The California Water 
Conservation, Flood Control and Stormwater Management Act of 2016" ("Initiative") and a 
request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to section 
10( d) of Article II of the California Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ),  I 
hereby submit timely amendments to the text of the Initiative.  As a proponent of the Initiative, I 
approve the submission of the amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is 
reasonably germane to the theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative. I request that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Sincerely, 

Executive Director, Association of California Water Agencies 

LEAGUE® 
CITIES 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

WWW.CACITIES.ORG 

1400 K STREET 
SACRAMENTO,  CA 95814 
PH: (916)  658-8200 
FX:  (916)  6 5 8-8240 

VIA MESSENGER 

January 15, 2016 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to The California Water Conservation, Flood Control and 
Stormwater Management Act of 2016 (15-0116) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 14, 2015 I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The California Water 
Conservation, Flood Control and Stormwater Management Act of 2016" ("Initiative") and a 
request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to  section 
10(d) of Article II of the California Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ),  I 
hereby submit timely amendments to the text of the Initiative.  As a proponent of the Initiative, I 
approve the submission of the amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is 
reasonably germane to the theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative. I request that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Christopher McKenzie 

Executive Director, League of California Cities 

January 19, 2016 	

15-0116  Amdt.#  J 

The California Water Conservation, Flood Control 


And Stormwater Management Act of 2016 


SECTION 1.  Title 

This measure shall be known as the California Water Conservation, Flood Control 
and Stormwater Management Act 2016 

SECTION 2.  Findings, Declarations and Purposes 

A 	 California's historic drought and the extensive heavy floods and property 

damage that often accompany heavy rains require that California local 
communities have the tools needed to further encourage conservation and 
discourage excessive use of water; to effectively manage and increase water 
supplies; to capture, clean and eliminate pollution from local water sources; 
and to better protect people and property from the dangers of floods. 

B. 	 Effective local management of water supplies includes authorizing local 

agencies to design rates to encourage water conservation and discourage 
excessive use of water. 

C. 	 Local agencies should also invest in infrastructure to CcJ.pture and clean water 

polluted by toxic chemicals and trash; recycle and reuse rainwater and 
stormwater runoff; and to prevent toxic stormwater and urban runoff from 
contaminating sources of drinking water, including rivers, lakes, streams, and 
groundwater, and polluting beaches, coastal waters, and wetlands. 

D. 	 California must also improve local flood control by better capturing and 

managing storm and flood waters and upgrading storm drains, sewer and 
drainage systems to protect properties from floods and increase local 
supplies of water available for public use. 

E. 	 Existing state laws governing the funding oflocal water supplies, clean water, 

water conservation and flood water protection were not developed with 
California's current water realities in mind. 

F. 	 Furthermore, local governments face thousands of dollars in fines per day 

from the state and federal governments if they cannot meet obligations 
under the federal Clean Water Act and state laws and regulations to 
adequately capture and treat toxic stormwater and urban runoff. 

1 


January 19, 2016 

G. 	 An alternative method for funding critical local water supplies, water quality, 

water conservation and flood protection projects is needed. 

H. 	 This measure establishes an alternative funding method that authorizes local 

agencies to: 

i. 	 Set rates for customers to encourage water conservation, prevent 

waste, and discourage excessive use of water. 

ii. 	 Levy fees or charges, subject to ratepayer protest, for flood control, and 
for management of stormwater to protect coastal waters, rivers, lakes, 
streams, groundwater and other sources of drinking water from 
contamination and to comply with the federal Clean Water Act and state 
laws and regulations. 

iii. 	 Use fees or charges to reduce water, and sewer fees or charges for low­

income customers. 

I. 	 Any local agency that utilizes this alternative funding method for water, flood 
control, stormwater, or sewer service should be required to adhere to strict 
accountability, transparency and ratepayer protections. This includes: 

i. 	 Providing local ratepayers with a description of the need for the 

proposed fee or charge and a list of the projects and purposes projected 
to be funded by any proposed fee  or charge in advance of any public 
hearing or consideration of the fee or charge; 

ii. 	 Posting the description of the proposal on the agency's Internet website 

with all applicable exhibits; 

iii. 	 Providing local ratepayers a notice of the date and time of the public 

hearing the local agency will hold on the proposed fee or charge; 

iv. 	 If written protests against the fee or charge are presented by a majority 
of persons to whom the local agency sent the notice about the proposal 
then the local agency shall not impose, increase or extend the fee or 
charge; 

v. 	 All money must be spent for the local purpose for which the fee or 

charge was imposed and cannot be taken by state government; 

vi. 	 Revenues derived from the fee or charge shall not exceed the 

reasonable cost to the local agency of providing the water, flood control, 
stormwater, or sewer service or be used for any purpose other than 
that for which it was imposed; 

vii. The manner in which the costs are allocated to a fee payor shall bear a 
fair or reasonable relationship to the fee payor's burden on or benefits 
received from the water, flood control, stormwater, or sewer service; 
viii. 	 The initiative power of voters may be used to repeal or reduce the fee 

or charge in the future with the filing of a petition calling for an election 
on the question; 

ix. 	 Independent annual audits shall be made available to the public 

showing how all funds are spent. 

2 

January 19, 2016 

J. 	 This new funding method will allow local agencies to invest in the water 

supplies, water quality, flood protection and water management and 
conservation programs we need, while guaranteeing a high level of 
accountability and ratepayer protections. 

SECTION 3.  Section 8 is hereby added to Article X of the California 
Constitution to read as follows: 

SEC. 8 Water, Flood Control, Stormwater, and Sewer Service 

(a) Alternative funding method. This section provides alternative procedures and 
requirements for funding water service, flood control service, stormwater service, 
and sewer service independent of any other procedures and requirements in this 
Constitution for funding these services. 

(1) A local agency that adheres to the procedures and requirements of this section, 
including the strict accountability requirements to protect local ratepayers, may use 
at its discretion, the provisions of this section instead of any other procedures or 
requirements in this Constitution for funding the cost of providing water service, 
flood control service, stormwater service, and sewer service only if undertaken 
voluntarily and at the sole discretion of the local agency. 

(2) The revenues derived from the fees or charges imposed in accordance with this 
section may only be used by the local agency that imposed, increased or extended 
the fee or charge, and like other fees or charges imposed, increased or extended by 
local agencies, the Legislature is prohibited from reallocating, transferring, 
borrowing, appropriating, restricting the use of, or otherwise using the proceeds of 
such fees or charges. 

(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 

(1)  "Fee" or "charge" means any levy other than an ad valorem tax, a special tax, or 
an assessment, imposed by a local agency upon a parcel or upon a person as an 
incident of property ownership, including a user fee or charge for water service, 
flood control service, stormwater service, or sewer service having a direct 
relationship to property ownership. 

(2)  "Flood control service" means any system of public improvements, facilities, 
projects, or services for the collection, conveyance, drainage, control, conservation, 
or management, of flood water to:  (A) reduce the risk of flooding of public or private 
property, or (B)  comply with federal or state laws, rules and regulations. 

(3) "Local agency" means any city, county, city and county, including a charter city 
or county, special district, or any other local or regional governmental entity. 

3 

January 19, 2016 

(4) "Property ownership" shall be deemed to include tenancies of real property 
where tenants are directly liable to pay the fee  or charge. 

(5) "Sewer service" means any system of public improvements, facilities, projects, or 
services for the collection, conveyance, conservation, drainage, disposal, recycling or 
treatment of dry weather runoff, sewage or waste to: (A)  conserve and protect 
sources of drinking water, such as rivers, lakes, streams and groundwater, or the 
environment, such as beaches, coastal waters, and wetlands, from toxic chemicals, 
biological contaminants, and other pollutants; (B)  protect public health and safety; 
or (C)  comply with federal or state laws, rules, and regulations. 

(6)  "Stormwater service" means any system of public improvements, facilities, 
projects or services for the collection, conveyance, conservation, drainage, disposal, 
recycling or treatment of stormwater and dry weather runoff to:  (A)  protect sources 
of drinking water, such as rivers, lakes, streams and groundwater, or the 
environment, such as beaches, coastal waters, and wetlands from toxic chemicals, 
biological contaminants, and other pollutants; (B)  protect public health and 
safety;(C) conserve water; or (D)  comply with federal or state laws, rules and 
regulations. 

(7)  "Water service" means any system of public improvements, facilities, projects or 
services intended to provide for the production, management, storage, supply, 
treatment, recycling, conservation or distribution of water from any source. 

(cJ  Requirements for new, increased or extended fees or charges. A fee or charge for 
water service, flood control service, stormwater service, or sewer service shall not 
be imposed, increased, or extended by a local agency pursuant to this section unless 
it meets all of the following requirements: 

(1) Revenues derived from the fee or charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost to 
the local agency of providing the water service, flood control service, stormwater 
service, or sewer service. 

(2) Revenues derived from the fee or charge shall not be used for any purpose other 
than that for which the fee or charge was imposed. 

(3) The manner in which the costs of the water service, flood control service, 
stormwater service, or sewer service are allocated to a fee payor shall bear a fair or 
reasonable relationship to the fee payor's burdens on or benefits received from the 
water service, flood control service, stormwater service, or sewer service. 

(dJ  Conservation fee or charge; low-income households. A local agency that imposes, 
extends, or increases a fee or charge pursuant to this section may do either or both 
of the following: 

4 

January 19, 2016 

(1) Allocate the cost of water service, flood control service, stormwater service or 
sewer service by increasing or decreasing the amount of a fee  or charge as part of a 
rate structure reasonably designed to encourage water conservation and resource 
management in furtherance of the policy established in section 2; 

(2) Increase the amount of a fee or charge to derive revenues that do not exceed the 
reasonable cost of reducing such fee or charge for lower-income households. 

(e)  Notice, public hearing and majority protest. A local agency shall comply with the 
procedures of this subdivision in imposing, increasing, or extending a fee or charge 
for water service, flood control service,-stormwater service, or sewer service 
pursuant to this section: 

(1) The local agency shall provide written notice by mail of the new fee or charge or 
the proposed increase in or extension of an existing fee or charge to the fee payor 
listed in the local agency's billing, or customer service records or other appropriate 
records. If the fee or charge is or will be imposed on a parcel, the local agency shall 
provide written notice to the record owner as provided in paragraph (4).  The local 
agency may include the notice in the agency's regular billing statement for the fee or 
charge to the person at the address to which the agency customarily mails the 
billing statement for water service, flood control service, stormwater service, or 
sewer service.  If the customer is billed only electronically, the agency shall provide 
notice by mail. 

(2) The notice required by paragraph (1) shall include the amount of the fee or 
charge proposed to be imposed on the :recipient of the notice or the basis upon 
which the amount of the fee or charge will be calculated, together with the date, 
time and location of the public hearing on the fee or charge. The notice also shall 
state that if written protests against the fee or charge are presented by a majority of 
persons to whom the local agency sent the notice required by paragraph (1), then 
the local agency shall not impose, increase or extend the fee or charge. 

(3) The notice required by paragraph (1) shall include a general description of the 
services, facilities and improvements projected to be funded with the proceeds 
derived from the new fee or charge or proposed increase in, or extension of the fee 
or charge. A more complete description of the projected services, facilities and 
improvements, including any applicable exhibits, shall be made available at an 
accessible location and on the local agency's Internet website. 

(4) If the local agency desires to preserve any authority it may have to record or 
enforce a lien on the parcel to which service is provided, the local agency shall also 
mail notice to the record owner's address shown on the last equalized assessment 
roll if that address is different than the billing address. 

(5) The local agency shall conduct a public hearing upon the proposed fee or charge 
not less than 45 days after mailing the notice required by paragraph (1).  At the 

5 

January 19, 2016 

public hearing, the local agency shall consider all oral and written protests against 
the fee or charge.  If written protests against the fee or charge are presented by a 
majority of persons to whom the local agency sent the notice required by paragraph 
(1), then the local agency shall not impose, increase or extend the fee or charge.  One 
written protest per service address shall be counted in calculating a majority protest 
pursuant to this paragraph. 

(f)  Burden of proof.  The local agency bears the burden of proving by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the amount of a fee or charge is no more than 
necessary to cover the reasonable costs of the water service, flood control service, 
stormwater service, or sewer service, and that the manner in which those costs are 
allocated to a payor bear a fair or reasonable relationship to the payor's burdens on, 
or benefits received from, the water service, flood control service, stormwater 
service, or sewer service. A fee or charge levied pursuant to and in compliance with 
this section is not a tax 

(g)  Initiative power for fees or charges. Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
Constitution, including, but not limited to Sections 8 and 9 of Article II, the initiative 
power shall not be prohibited or otherwise limited in matters of reducing or 
· 
repealing any fee  or charge for water service, flood control service, stormwater 
service, or sewer service adopted, increased or extended pursuant to this section. 
The power of the initiative to affect such fees or charges shall be applicable to all 
local agencies and neither the Legislature nor any local government charter shall 
impose a signature requirement higher than that applicable to statewide statutory 
initiatives. 

(h) Mandatory audit. Any local agency that approves a fee or charge for water 
service, flood control service, stormwater service, or sewer service in accordance 
with this section shall cause to be prepared an independent financial audit of the 
receipt and expenditure of the revenues derived from the fee or charge. Such an 
audit may be part of a comprehensive audit of the agency's finances, but the audit 
shall identify the revenues received and expended in accordance with this section 
with sufficient clarity to help ratepayers compare the use of the funds to the 
description provided in paragraph (3) of subdivision (e). 

SECTION 4.  Severability 

If the provisions of this act, or part thereof, are for any reason held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in 
full force and effect and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. 

SECTION 5.  Conflicting Measures 

It is the intent of the people that in the event that this measure and another measure 
relating to the establishment of an alternative method of imposing, increasing, or 
extending fees or charges to fund water service, flood control service, stormwater 

6 

January 19, 2016 

service, or sewer service appear on the same statewide election ballot, the 
provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with 
this measure, and if approved by the voters, this measure shall take effect 
notwithstanding. 

SECTION 6.  Liberal Construction 

The provisions of this act shall be liberally construed in order to effectuate its 
purposes and the intent of the voters to provide local agencies alternative 
procedural and substantive requirements for imposing fees and charges for water 
service, flood control service, stormwater service, and sewer service from those 
otherwise found in the Constitution. 

7 

