1 5  - 0  1 0  1 

October~ 2015 

~CEIVfa 

OCT  2 9 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Fair Healthcare Pricing Act of 2016 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

In accordance with the requirements of Elections Code section 9001(a), I request 
that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purpose and points 
of the initiative measure entitled the "Fair Healthcare Pricing Act of2016".  The text of the 
measure, a check for $200.00, and the certifications required by Elections Code sections 9001 
and 9608 are enclosed. 

Please direct all correspondence and inquiries regarding this measure to: 

Karen Getman 
Remcho, Johansen &  Purcell, LLP 
201  Dolores A venue 
San Leandro, CA 94577 
Phone:  (510) 346-6200 
Fax:  (510) 346-6201 

~ Roberta B. Joh 

Enclosures 
(00260813) 

1 5  - 0  1 0  1 

FAIR HEALTHCARE PRICING ACT OF 2016 

This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with the provisions of 

Article II,  Section 8, of the California Constitution. 

This initiative measure amends and adds sections to the Health and Safety Code and 

Corporations Code; therefore, existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed in strikeout 
type and new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are 
new. 

SECTION 1.  Name. 

This act shall be known as the "Fair Healthcare Pricing Act of2016." 

SEC. 2.  Findings and Purpose. 

This act,  adopted by the People of the State of California, makes the following Findings 

and has the following Purpose: 

A.  The People make the following findings: 

(1)  Access to health care services is of vital concern to the people of this State. 

(2)  The State has an interest in ensuring that individuals and families have access to affordable 
health care services and are not charged excessive rates for the provision of health care services. 

(3)  State data reflect that private hospitals operating in this State, on average, charge patients 
325 percent above the actual cost of providing health care, and some private hospitals charge 
more than 800 percent above the actual cost of the care provided. 

( 4)  Although private hospitals, pursuant to federal requirements, generally set uniform charges 
for services and items, patients who are uninsured and underinsured often pay far more than 
insurers and health care service plans.  The result is that unreasonably high hospital charges 
disproportionately affect uninsured and underinsured individuals and families. 

(5)  Excessive hospital charges are a leading cause of bankruptcy and financial distress among 
uninsured and underinsured individuals and families. 

(6)  Limiting private hospital charges to a maximum of25 percent more than a good faith 
reasonable estimate of the actual cost to the hospital of providing patient care would protect 
individuals and families from excessive charges while providing hospitals with reasonable 
returns on their investments. 

(7)  Allowing private hospitals that provide wholly or partially unreimbursed care to uninsured 
patients and patients in government programs to adjust their charges to account for losses 

1 

incurred in providing such care is fair and will promote public health and welfare by encouraging 
private hospitals to provide such care to individuals and families in need. 

(8)  Existing requirements of law do not adequately deter private hospitals from charging 
excessively high prices for the health care they provide.  Nor do existing requirements of law 
adequately provide standards for identifying reasonable prices private hospitals should be 
permitted to charge. 

B. (1)  It is the purpose of this Act to ensure that private hospitals charge patients amounts based 
on good faith reasonable estimates of the actual costs of providing health care, with appropriate 
adjustments to encourage private hospitals to provide care to uninsured patients and patients in 
government programs. 

(2)  The People intend that this Act will be cost neutral for the State of California to implement 
and administer. 

SEC. 3. 

Article 11.5 (commencing with Section 1339.611) of Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and 
Safety Code is  added, to read: 

1339.611.  Limitations on Charges; Required Refund for Overcharging. 

(a)  A  hospital shall set and maintain charges for individual services and items on its charge 
description master based on a good faith reasonable estimate that the charges will ensure that 
both of the following requirements are satisfied: 

(1)  The hospital will not charge any person for any patient service or item provided on 

or after July 1,  2017 an amount greater than 2 5 percent more than a good faith 
reasonable estimate of the actual cost to the hospital of providing the service or item, 
adjusted to account for the hospital's actual qualifYing losses in accordance with this 
section. 

(2)  The hospital will not have total charges in any fiscal year ending on or after June 30, 

2018,  that exceed 25 percent more than the hospital's total patient care expenses 
adjusted to account for the hospital's actual qualifYing losses in  accordance with this 
formula:  The hospital's total charges shall be less than or equal to  125eF I 100, 
where  "e" means the total patient care expenses in the fiscal year,  and "F" is the 
individual charge adjustment factor. 

(b)  On or after July 1,  2017,  a hospital shall not charge any person for any patient care service 
or item an amount greater than 25 percent more than a goodfaith reasonable estimate of the 
actual cost to the hospital of providing the service or item multiplied by the hospital's individual 
charge adjustment factor. 

(c)  Any hospital that has total charges in any fiscal year ending on or after June 30,  2018,  that 
exceed 25 percent more than the hospital's total patient care expenses,  adjusted in accordance 
with the formula set forth in paragraph (2)  of subdivision (a)  of this section, shall have engaged 

2 

in overcharging and shall,  within 180 days of the end of the fiscal year, pay for each individual 
patient care service or item provided to each individual patient in  the fiscal year the required 
refund defined in subdivision (o)  of Section  1339.616.  If one payer was charged by the hospital 
for the provision of a given service or item to  an  individual patient,  the hospital shall pay the full 
required refund to  that payer.  If more than one payer was charged for the service or item,  the 
hospital shall divide and distribute the total required refund among the payers consistent with 
the payers' relative obligations to pay for the service or item. 

(d)  A  hospital shall attest to the following statement on all billing statements made to patients 
and payers on or after July 1,  2017:  "The charges appearing on this hospital bill do not exceed 
25% more than a good faith  reasonable estimate of the actual cost o.f providing the healthcare 
services and items identified, adjusted in accordance with the California Fair Healthcare 
Pricing Act of 2016. " 

(e)  A  hospital shall not charge any payer for any patient care service or item any amount more 
than the charge for that service or item set forth in the hospital's charge description master. 

(f)  For purposes of satisfYing subdivisions (a),  (b),  and (c),  a hospital may not change its 
existing fiscal year unless the hospital changes its ownership or corporate structure as a result 
of a sale or merger. 

(g)  If a hospital proves in  any court action that application of subdivision (a),  (b),  or (c)  to the 
hospital will,  in any particular fiscal year,  violate due process or effect a taking of private 
property requiring just compensation under the Constitution of this State or the Constitution of 
the United States,  the subdivision or subdivisions at issue shall apply to  the hospital,  except that 
as to  the fiscal year in question the number "25" whenever it appears in the subdivision of 
subdivisions at issue shall be replaced by the lowest possible whole number such that application 
of the subdivision or subdivisions to the hospital will not violate due process or effect a taking of 
private property requiring just compensation.  In any civil action,  the burden shall be on the 
hospital to  identify and provide evidence in support of an appropriate replacement number. 

1339.612.  Reporting; Public Availability of Charge Setting Methodology. 

(a)  Within 210 days of the end of a hospital's fiscal year ending on or after January 1,  2018, a 
hospital shall report the following information to the department: 

(1)  Total patient care expenses; 
(2)  Total private payer patient care expenses: 
(3)  Actual qualifying losses: 
(4)  Qualifying expenses: 
(5)  Reasonable and allowable costs in each of the categories set forth in paragraphs (1) 

and (2)  ofsubdivision (k)  ofSection 1339.616; 

(6)  Qualifying reimbursements; 
(7)  Revenues received in  each of the categories reflected n paragraphs (1),  (2),  and 

(3)  of subdivision (l)  ofSection 1339.616; 

(8)  Total charges; and 
(9)  Any refund made pursuant to subdivision (c)  of Section 1339.611. 

3 

(b)  The department shall make the information provided pursuant to subdivision (a)  available to 
the public upon request. 

(c)  The department shall assess a reasonable fee on hospitals to cover any costs associated with 
processing the reports required by subdivision (a)  or providing written notifications to hospitals 
pursuant to subdivisions (c)  and (d)  of Section 1339.613. 

(d)  A hospital shall provide to any person within 10 business days after a request made on or 
after July 1,  2017,  a complete description of the methodology it uses to set charges on its charge 
description master,  including a complete description of the methodology it uses to  ensure that it 
complies with Section 1339.611. 

1339.613.  Violation;  Penalties. 

(a)  Compliance with this article shall be a condition of licensure under this chapter. 

(b)  The department may assess a civil penalty against a hospital that issues a billing statement 
that fails to comply with subdivision (d)  of Section  1339.611.  The penalty may not exceed $500 
for each noncompliant billing statement issued by the hospital,  and combined penalties may not 
exceed a total of $5,000 for billing statements related to the same service or item provided to  an 
individual patient. 

(c)  The department may assess a civil penalty against a hospital that fails to make a report of 
information that complies with the requirements in subdivision (a)  of Section  1339.612 and any 
regulations promulgated pursuant to his article.  The penalty may not exceed $1,000 for each 
day a compliant report is delinquent after the date on which the report is due,  up to a maximum 
of $100, 000.  No penalty may be assessed against a hospital under this section until 10 business 
days have elapsed after written notification to  the hospital of its failure to file a compliant 
report,  and no penalty may be assessed if the hospital files the required report within those 
10 business days. 

(d)  The department may assess a civil penalty against a hospital that fails to  comply with a 
request made by any person for information that the hospital must provide pursuant to 
subdivision (d)  of Section 1339.612.  The penalty may not exceed $1,000 for each day that the 
hospitalfails to provide the required information,  up to  a maximum of$100,000.  No penalty 
may be assessed against a hospital under this subdivision until 10 business days have elapsed 
after written request to  the hospital by any person requesting information described in 
subdivision (d)  of Section 13 3 9. 612,  and no penalty may be assessed if the hospital provides the 
required information to the requesting person within those 10 business days. 

(e)  Penalties assessed under this section shall be due within 10 business days of their 
assessment,  unless within those 10 business days the hospital petitions the department for 
reconsideration of the assessment,  in which case no penalty shall be due under this section until 
after the department reviews and acts on the petition. 

(1)  The department shall promulgate regulations governing the review,  acceptance,  and 

denial of petitions filed pursuant to this subdivision. 

4 

(2)  The department shall assess a reasonable fee on petitioning hospitals to  cover any 

costs associated with processing a petition made pursuant to  this subdivision. 

1339.614.  Enforcement; Rights and Remedies: 

(a)  In  addition to  any other enforcement actions available under the law,  and notwithstanding 
any other provision of law,  the department or the Attorney General may bring or intervene in a 
civil action for a violation of this article for damages suffered by patients or other payers, 
individually or as a class,  including but not limited to any required refund; other damages;  civil 
penalties as provided in Section 1339.613; and appropriate equitable relief 

(b)  The rights and remedies provided for in this chapter shall not limit,  affect,  change,  or repeal 
any statutory or common-law rights or remedies. 

1339.615.  Regulations; Administrative Fees. 

(a)  The department may adopt regulations implementing this article,  including but not limited to 
the regulations promulgated pursuant to paragraph (1)  of subdivision (e)  of Section  1339.613. 

(b)  The department may assess reasonable fees on hospitals in amounts designed to cover the 
costs it incurs in administering and enforcing this article,  including but not limited to the fees 
provided for in subdivision (c)  of Section  1339.612 and paragraph (2)  of subdivision (e)  of 
Section  1339.613. 

1339.616.  Definitions. 

For the purposes of this chapter: 

(a)  "Actual cost" means the average  "reasonable and allowable costs" that a hospital incurs 

per patient in providing a given service or item appearing on the hospital's charge 
description master. 

(b)  "Actual qualifying losses" means a hospital's  "qualifying expenses" minus the hospital's 
"qualifying reimbursements."  If qualifying reimbursements are equal to or greater than 
qualifying expenses,  then actual qualifying losses are zero. 

(c)  "Adjusted maximum charge" means the charge for a service or item on a hospital's charge 
description master on the date the service or item was provided to  the patient multiplied by 
an  "adjustment factor" intended to  reflect certain losses experienced by hospitals in 
providing health care to patients in government-sponsored programs and self-pay patients. 
The adjustment factor for this subdivision shall be equal to the ratio m I c,  where  "m" is the 
retrospectively adjusted maximum allowable charges for all items and services provided in 
the most recently concluded fiscal year,  and  "c" is the hospital's  "total charges" in  the most 
recently concluded fiscal year.  "m" shall be calculated as the lesser of2.25e and 1.25e(l + 
qlp),  where  "e" is the hospital's  "total patient care expenses" in  the most recently concluded 
fiscal year;  "q" is the hospital's actual qualifying losses in  the most recently concluded 

5 

fiscal year; and "p" is  the hospital's  "total private payer patient care expenses" in the most 
recently concluded fiscal year. 

(d)  "Charge" means the gross charges billed by a hospital for a given service or item on the 

hospital's charge description master. 

(e)  "Charge description master" shall have the same meaning as that term  is defined in 

Section 13 3 9. 51. 

(f)  "Hospital" means a hospital licensed under subdivision (a)  of Section 1250.  Hospital does 

not include:  (1)  children's hospitals,  as defined in paragraph (13)  of subdivision (a)  of 
Section 14105.98 of the Welfare and Institutions Code;  (2) public hospitals,  as defined in 
paragraph (25)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 14105.98 of the  Welfare and Institutions Code; 
or (3)  hospitals operated or licensed by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 

(g)  "Individual charge adjustment factor" means a factor,  "F," that shall be calculated as the 

lesser of 1.8 and [l + (qlp)],  where  "q" is the hospital's actual qualifying losses for the most 
recently concluded fiscal year,  and "p" is the hospital's total private payer patient care 
expenses for the most recently concluded fiscal year. 

(h)  "Office" means the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. 

(i)  "Payer" means any person or other entity that is or was legally required or responsible to 

make payment with respect to an item or service (or any portion thereof) provided by a 
hospital to  a patient. 

OJ  "Primary payer" means the payer other than the patient who is or was legally required or 

responsible to  make payment with respect to an item or service,  or any portion thereof 
before any other payer other than the patient. 

(k)  "Qualifying expenses" means the sum of the following expenses in a hospital's most recently 

concluded.fiscal year: 
(1)  All reasonable and allowable costs incurred by the hospital in providing care to patients 

where the primary payer is any federal,  state,  county,  city,  or other local government 
program,  except the Medicare program; and 

(2)  All reasonable and allowable costs incurred by the hospital in providing care to self-pay 

patients,  as that term is defined in subdivision (f)  a,[ Section 127400. 

(l)  "Qualifying reimbursements" means the sum of the following revenues received in a 

hospital's most recently concluded fiscal year. 
(1)  All revenues received as reimbursements from any payer for care provided to patients 
where the primary payer is any federal,  state,  county,  city,  or other local government 
program, except the Medicare program; 

(2)  All revenues received as reimbursements from any payer for care provided to self-pay 

patients, as that term is de,fined in subdivision (f)  of Section 12 7 400; and 

6 

(3)  All revenues received as lump sum payments from any federal,  state,  county,  city,  or 
other local government program, except the Medicare program,  that are intended to 
defray patient care expenses,  including but not limited to Medi-Cal Disproportionate 
Share payments,  Quality Assurance Fee revenue,  and revenue from  California's 
Distressed Hospital fund. 

(m)  "Reasonable and allowable costs" shall be determined in accordance with Part 413 

(commencing with Section 413.1) ofTitle 42 of the Code o.fFederal Regulations. 

(n)  "Required refund" means, for each individual service or item provided by a hospital to an 

individual patient, an amount equal to all revenues received by the hospital from any source 
for providing that individual service or item to  the patient minus the adjusted maximum 
charge for that service or item.  lf the adjusted maximum charge is equal to or greater than 
all revenues received by the hospital from any source for providing the individual service or 
item to the individual patient in question, the required refund for that individual service or 
item shall equal zero. 

(o)  "Revenues received" means all amounts actually received and all accounts receivable, 

except that accounts receivable may be discounted in accordance with a good faith 
reasonable estimate of bad debt.  Revenues received shall be calculated in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles for hospitals. 

(p)  "Total charges" means all charges billed to any payer in a hospital's most recently 

concluded fiscal year. 

(q)  "Total patient care expenses" means all reasonable and allowable costs incurred by a 
hospital in providing patient care in the hospital's most recently concluded fiscal year. 

(r)  "Total private payer patient care expenses" means the sum of all reasonable and allowable 

costs incurred by a hospital in  its most recently concluded fiscal year in providing care to 
patients where: 
(1)  the primary payer is not any federal,  state,  county,  city,  or other local government 

program,  including the Medicare program; and 

(2)  the patient is not a self-pay patient, as that term is defined in subdivision (f)  of 

Section 127400. 

(s)  "Year, "unless otherwise indicated,  refers to a hospital's fiscal year for accounting 

purposes. 

SEC. 4. 

Section 9230 of the Corporations Code is amended to read: 

9230.(a)  except as the Attorney General is empowered to act in the enforcement of the criminal 
laws of this state, and except as the Attorney General is expressly empowered by 
subdivisions (b), (c), and (d), and Article 11.5 (commencing with Section 1339. 611) of Chapter 2 

7 

of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code,  the Attorney General shall have no powers with 
respect to any corporation incorporated or classified as a religious corporation under or pursuant 
to this code. 

(b)  The Attorney General shall have authority to institute an action or proceeding under 
Section 803  of the Code of Civil Procedure, to obtain judicial determination that a corporation is 
not properly qualified or classified as a religious corporation under the provisions of this part. 

(c)  The Attorney General shall have the authority (1) expressly granted with respect to any 
subject or matter covered by Sections 9660 to 9690, inclusive; (2) to initiative criminal 
procedures to prosecute violations of the criminal laws, and upon conviction seek restitution as 
punishment; and (3) to represent as legal counsel any other agency or department of the State of 
California expressly empowered to act with respect to the status of religious corporations, or 
expressly empowered to regulate activities in which religious corporations, as well as other 
entities, may engage. 

(d)  Where property has been solicited and received form the general public, based on a 
representation that it would be used for a specific charitable purpose other than general support 
of the corporation's activities, and has been used in a manner contrary to that specific charitable 
purpose for which the property was solicited, the Attorney General may institute an action to 
enforce the specific charitable purpose for which the property was solicited; provided ( 1) that 
before bringing such action the Attorney General shall notify the corporation that an action will 
be brought unless the corporation takes immediate steps to correct the improper diversion of 
funds,  and (2) that in the event it becomes impractical or impossible for the corporation to devote 
the property to the specified charitable purpose, or that the directors or members of the 
corporation in good faith expressly conclude and record in writing that the stated purpose for 
which the property was contributed is no longer in accord with the policies of the corporation, 
then the directors or members of the corporation may approve or ratify in good faith the use of 
such property for the general purposes of the corporation rather than for the specific purpose for 
which it was contributed. 

As used in this section, "solicited from the general public" means solicitations directed to the 
general public, or to any individual or group of individuals who are not directly affiliated with 
the soliciting organization and includes, but is not limited to, instances where property has been 
solicited on an individual basis, such as door to door, direct mail, face to face,  or similar 
solicitations, as well as solicitations on a more general level to the general public, or a portion 
thereof, such as through the media, including newspapers, television, radio, or similar 
solicitations. 

(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any individual rights of action which were 
accorded under law in existence prior to the enactment of Chapter 1324 of the Statutes of 1980. 

As used in this section, "individual rights of action" include only rights enforceable by private 
individuals and do not include any right of action of a public officer in an official capacity 
regardless of whether the officer bring the action on behalf of a private individual. 

8 

(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require express statutory authorization by the 
California Legislature of any otherwise lawful and duly authorized action by any agency of local 
government. 

SEC. 5.  Amendment. 

Pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 10 of Article II of the California Constitution, this 

act may be amended either by a subsequent measure submitted to  a vote of the people at a 
statewide election; or by statute validly passed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor, 
but only if consistent with or to further the purposes of this act. 

SEC. 6.  Competing Measures. 

In the event that this measure and another measure that limits maximum prices hospitals 

may charge for all health care services or items shall appear on the same statewide ballot, the 
provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this measure. 
Another measure that regulates charity care or discounted services hospitals must provide shall 
not be deemed to be in conflict with this measure.  Another measure shall not be deemed to be in 
conflict with this measure solely because it amends Section 9230 of the Corporations Code.  In 
the event this measure receives a greater number of affirmative votes than a measure deemed to 
be in conflict with it, the provisions of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the other 
measure or measures shall be null and void. 

SEC. 7.  Severability. 

It is the intent of the People that the provisions of this act are severable and that if any 

provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such 
invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this act which can be given effect 
without the invalid provision or application. 

9 

