1  5  - 0  1 0  2 

~CEIVE() 

OCT  2 9 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

October_, 2015 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Charity Care Act of 2016 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

In accordance with the requirements of Elections Code section 900l(a), I request 
that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purpose and points 
of the initiative measure entitled the "Charity Care Act of2016".  The text ofthe measure, a 
check for $200.00, and the certifications required by Elections Code sections 9001  and 9608 are 
enclosed. 

Please direct all correspondence and inquiries regarding this measure to: 

Karen Getman 
Remcho, Johansen &  Purcell, LLP 
201  Dolores A venue 
San Leandro, CA 94577 
Phone:  (510) 346-6200 
Fax:  (510) 346-6201 

Enclosures 
(00260815) 

1  h  - 0  1 0  2 

CHARITY CARE ACT OF 2016 

This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with the provisions of 

Article II, Section 8, of the California Constitution. 

This initiative measure amends and adds sections to the Corporations Code and the 

Revenue and Taxation Code; therefore, existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed in 
strikeout type and new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that 
they are new. 

SECTION 1.  Name. 

This act shall be known as the "Charity Care Act of2016." 

SEC. 2.  Findings and Purpose. 

This act, adopted by the people ofthe State of California, makes the following Findings 

and has the following Purpose: 

A.  The People make the following findings: 

(1)  Access to health care services is of vital concern to the people of this State. 

(2)  Although counties provide certain health care services to needy patients, the counties are not 
fully able to serve the public's need for affordable health care. 

(3)  Private nonprofit hospitals currently meet certain needs of needy patients through charity 
care and provision of discounted health care services.  Public recognition of the unique role of 
nonprofit hospitals has resulted in favorable tax treatment of the hospitals, which is a significant 
benefit for those hospitals.  In exchange, nonprofit hospitals assume a social obligation to further 
the public interest in ensuring that needy patients continue to have access to charity care and 
discounted health care services. 

(4)  Existing requirements oflaw do not adequately ensure that nonprofit hospitals provide 
charity care to the communities they serve in amounts that are appropriate in light of the 
significant benefits the hospitals receive from the State.  Nor do existing requirements oflaw 
adequately identify standards for appropriate amounts of charity care and discounted health care 
services that nonprofit hospitals should provide in exchange for the benefits they receive from 
the State. 

B.  It is the purpose of this Act to ensure that nonprofit hospitals that receive significant benefits 
from the State, including favorable tax treatment, provide appropriate levels of charity care and 
discounted health care services to needy patients. 

1 

SEC. 3. 

Chapter 9.5 (commencing with Section 5940) of the Corporations Code is added to read: 

5940.  Definitions.  For the purposes of this chapter: 

(a)  "Affiliated health care service plan" means a health care service plan licensed under 
Section 1353 of the Health and Safety Code that in a  "nonprofit health system's" most recently 
concluded fiscal year was the primary payer for 7 5 percent or more of all annual inpatient 
discharges from  "nonprofit hospitals" that were part of the nonprofit health system on the date 
of the discharge,  excluding inpatient discharges where the  "primary payer" was Medicare, 
Medi-Cal,  or a County Indigent program (pursuant to Section 1700 of the Welfare and 
Institutions Code),  where the patient was a self-pay patient (as  that term is defined in 
subdivision (f) of Section 127400 of the Health and Safety Code),  or where the care was 
provided as unreimbursed "charity care. " 

(b)  "Charity care" means the unreimbursed cost to a nonprofit hospital of 

(1)  providing, funding,  or otherwise financially supporting health care services or items on 

an inpatient or outpatient basis to  "needy patients"; 

(2)  providing, funding,  or otherwise financially supporting health care services or items 

provided to needy patients through other nonprofit or public outpatient clinics, hospitals, 
or health care organizations; and/or 

(3)  providing, funding,  or otherwise financially supporting the following community benefits, 

provided that the provision, funding or financial support of such benefits is 
demonstrated to reduce community health care costs:  vaccination programs and 
services for low-income families;  chronic illness prevention programs and services; 
nursing and caregiver training; home-based health care programs for low-income 
families; exercise and/or nutrition programs for low-income families,·  or community(cid:173)
based mental health outreach and assessment programs for low-income families.  For 
purposes of this paragraph,  "low-income families" means families or individuals with 
income less than or equal to 200 percent of the federal poverty level. 

Charity care does not include the cost to a nonprofit hospital of paying any taxes or other 
governmental assessments,  uncollected fees,  or accounts written off as bad debt. 

(c)  "Contributions" means the dollar value of cash donations and the fair market value at the 
time of donation of in-kind donations to the nonprofit hospital from  individuals,  organizations, 
or other entities.  Contributions does not include the value of a donation designated or otherwise 
restricted by the donor for purposes other than charity care. 

(d)  "Integrated nonprofit health system " means any  "nonprofit health system " and affiliated 
health care service plan that satisfies both of the following requirements for the full fiscal year: 

(1)  The nonprofit health system and affiliated health care service plan are owned,  operated, 
or substantially controlled by the same person or persons or other legal entity or entities, 
including but not limited to by a shared corporate parent. 

2 

(2)  The affiliated health care service plan is jointly, or jointly and severally,  liable with the 

nonprofit health system or any one or more nonprofit hospital that is part of the nonprofit 
health system,  through a master indenture or other agreement or agreements, for one or 
more debt obligations,  including but not limited to loans,  leases,  commercial bonds, 
municipal bonds,  or other debt instruments owed to a third party outside the nonprofit 
health system, if the debt obligations individually or collectively are material under 
generally accepted accounting principles to any financial statement of the affiliated 
health care service plan, the nonprofit health system,  or one or more hospital that is part 
of the nonprofit health system. 

(e)  "Needy patient" shall have the same meaning as the term  "financially qualified patient" is 
defined in Section 127400 of the Health and Safety Code, provided that,  if a nonprofit hospital 
chooses to grant eligibility for its discount payment policy or charity care policies to patients 
with incomes over 3 50 percent of the federal poverty level,  as permitted by 
Section 127405(a)(1)(A) of the Health and Safety Code, patients eligible under such policies 
shall also be deemed "needy patients. " 

(f)  "Net patient revenue" shall be calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles for hospitals, and shall be consistent with information provided by a hospital in a 
compliant Hospital Annual Disclosure Report filed with the  "office" pursuant to Section 128735 
of the Health and Safety Code. 

(g)  "Nonprofit health system" means all nonprofit hospitals in this State that share the same 
fiscal year and that satisfy both of the following requirements: 

(1)  The nonprofit hospitals are owned,  operated,  or substantially controlled by the same 

person or persons or other legal entity or entities,  including but not limited to by a 
shared corporate parent. 

(2)  The nonprofit hospitals are jointly, or jointly and severally, liable,  through a master 

indenture or other agreement or agreements, for one or more debt obligations,  including 
but not limited to loans,  leases,  commercial bonds,  municipal bonds,  or other debt 
instruments owed to a third party outside the nonprofit health system, if the debt 
obligations individually or collectively are material to any financial statement of at least 
one of the nonprofit hospitals under generally accepted accounting principles for 
hospitals. 

A  nonprofit health system shall not include fewer than three nonprofit hospitals. 

(h)  "Nonprofit hospital" means a hospital licensed under subdivision (a)  of Section 1250 of the 
Health and Safety Code,  which is organized as,  owned and operated by,  or substantially 
controlled by,  a nonprofit corporation,  as defined in this part or Part 4,  or a nonprofit foreign 
corporation,  as defined in Section 5033.  Nonprofit hospital does not include children's 
hospitals, as defined in Section 16996 of the  Welfare and Institutions Code; public hospitals, as 
defined in paragraph (25)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 14105.98 of the Welfare and Institutions 
Code; or hospitals that are Medicare critical access hospitals pursuant to Section  1395i-4 of 
Title 42 of the United States Code. 

3 

(i)  "Nonprofit supporting entities" means nonprofit entities created by a nonprofit hospital or 
its parent entity to further the charitable purposes of the nonprofit hospital and that are owned 
or controlled by the nonprofit hospital or its parent entity. 

OJ  "Operating margin" is an accounting term,  which shall be calculated in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles for hospitals,  and shall be based on a hospital's 
operating earnings before depreciation and amortization. 

(k)  "Office" means the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. 

(l)  "Primary payer" means the person or other legal entity (other than the patient) that is or 
was legally required or responsible to make payment with respect to an item or service provided 
by a hospital to a patient (or any portion thereof) before any other person or other legal entity 
(other than the patient). 

(m)  "Safety-net nonprofit health system" means a nonprofit health system that in its fiscal year 
concluding in 2014,  or in any fiscal year thereafter,  satisfied each of the following conditions: 

(1)  The nonprofit hospitals that are part of the nonprofit health system at the time of the 

discharge together provided 10 percent or more of the State's total number of inpatient 
discharges from general acute care licensed beds (as defined in regulations adopted 
pursuant to Section 1250.1 of Article 1 of the Health and Safety Code) where the primary 
payer is Medi-Cal. 

(2)  The nonprofit hospitals that are part of the nonprofit health system provided a combined 
total of 100 million dollars or more in charity care.  For purposes of this paragraph, the 
amount of charity care provided by the nonprofit hospitals that are part of a nonprofit 
health system means the cost to the hospital of providing charity care,  as defined by the 
hospital's written charity care policy adopted pursuant to Section 12 7 405 of the Health 
and Safety Code,  consistent with data reported in compliance with the Health Data and 
Advisory Council Consolidation Act (commencing with Section 128675 of the Health and 
Safety Code) and any regulations,  rules,  or guidance issued under that chapter, for fiscal 
years concluding in 2014,  2015 and 20 16; and the amount reported to the Attorney 
General in accordance with Section 5 94 2 for fiscal years concluding in 2017 and 
thereafter. 

(3)  The nonprofit health system had a Medi-Cal utilization rate of25 percent or greater. 
For purposes of this paragraph,  "Medi-Cal utilization rate" means the ratio of "Medi(cid:173)
Cal discharges" divided by "all discharges," where "all discharges" means the number 
oftotal inpatient discharges from general acute care licensed beds from all hospitals that 
are part of the nonprofit health system at the time of the discharge,  and "Medi-Cal 
discharges" means the number of all discharges where Medi-Cal is the primary payer. 

The data employed to determine whether a health system satisfies the conditions in 
paragraphs (1),  (2),  and (3) shall be consistent with data reported in compliance with the Health 
Data and Advisory Council Consolidation Act (commencing with Section 12867 5) and any 
regulations,  rules,  or guidance issued under that chapter,  except as otherwise indicated in 
paragraph (2). 

4 

~ II 
~ li I 

I! 
' i 
I 

(n)  "Unreimbursed costs" means the costs a nonprofit hospital incurs for providing individuals 
inpatient and outpatient services or items for which the nonprofit hospital does not receive 
reimbursement from any source, and for which the nonprofit hospital has no expectation at the 
time the services or items are provided that any third-party payer will pay in part or in whole. 
The term does not include payer discounts or contractual adjustments in reimbursements to 
third-party payers or costs for which the nonprofit hospital receives any partial payment for the 
related service,  including but not limited to the following:  third-party insurance payments; 
Medicare payments; Medi-Cal payments; payments from Tricare of the Civilian Health and 
Medical Program of the Uniformed Services; state reimbursements for education; payments 
from pharmaceutical companies to pursue research; grant funds for research; and 
disproportionate share payments.  For purposes of this definition,  the term  "costs" shall be 
calculated by applying the cost to charge ratios,  according to the nonprofit hospital 's most 
recently filed Medicare cost report,  to billed charges.  For purposes of this definition,  charitable 
contributions and grants to a nonprofit hospital, including transfers from endowment or other 
funds controlled by the nonprofit hospital or its nonprofit supporting entities,  shall not be 
subtracted from the costs of providing services for purposes of determining the unreimbursed 
costs of charity care. 

5941.  Duty of Nonprofit Hospitals to Provide Appropriate Level of Charity Care. 

(a)  In order to qualify as a nonprofit corporation as defined in this part or Part 4,  to obtain and 
maintain tax-exempt status as provided by Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation  Code,  and 
to satisfy the requirements of this chapter,  a nonprofit hospital shall provide an appropriate level 
of charity care as provided in this section. 

(b)  For fiscal years beginning on or after January 1,  2017,  a nonprofit hospital shall annually 
satisfy the requirements of this chapter to provide an appropriate level of charity care by 
complying with the standard set forth  in subdivision (c). 

(c)  A nonprofit hospital annually shall provide charity care in a combined amount equal to at 
least five percent of the nonprofit hospital's net patient revenue.  For purposes of satisfying this 
subdivision,  a nonprofit hospital may not change its existing fiscal year unless the nonprofit 
hospital changes its ownership or corporate structure as a result of a sale or merger. 

(d)  A determination of the amount of charity care provided by a nonprofit hospital shall be 
based on the most recently completed and audited prior fiscal year of the nonprofit hospital. 

(e)  In any fiscal year that a nonprofit hospital,  through unintended miscalculation, fails to 
satisfy subdivision (c),  the nonprofit hospital shall not lose its tax-exempt status or nonprofit 
corporation status without the opportunity to cure the miscalculation in the fiscal year following 
the fiscal year the failure is discovered by both meeting the standard provided in subdivision (c) 
and providing an additional amount of charity care that is equal to the shortfall from the 
previous fiscal year.  A nonprofit hospital shall notify the Attorney General that it intends to cure 
a miscalculation.  Such notification shall be included in a nonprofit hospital's annual report 
submitted pursuant to subdivision (b)  of Section 5942.  A nonprofit hospital may apply this 
provision only once every five years. 

5 

(f)  If a nonprofit hospital reasonably determines that providing charity care in accordance with 
this section in a given fiscal year would result in the nonprofit  hospital having an annual 
operating margin of less than one percent,  the nonprofit hospital may petition the Attorney 
General to be excused in whole or in part from complying with subdivision (c)  in that fiscal year. 
The Attorney General may excuse compliance if he concurs with the nonprofit hospital's 
conclusion that compliance with subdivision (c)  would result in the nonprofit hospital having an 
operating margin of less than one percent in the fiscal year at issue. 

(g)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to a nonprofit hospital that is part of an 
integrated nonprofit health system or a nonprofit hospital that is part of a safety-net nonprofit 
health system. 

5942.  Reporting and Data Collection; Confidentiality of Patient Information. 

(a)  The Attorney General shall establish a uniform reporting and collection system for data 
regarding nonprofit hospitals 'provision of charity care. 

(b)  For fiscal years beginning on or after January 1,  2017,  nonprofit hospitals shall file annual 
reports with the Attorney General stating the charity care provided by the nonprofit hospitals. 
Nonprofit hospitals shall make these reports publicly available,  including by posting on an 
Internet Website,  except that any confidential patient-specific data included in the reports shall 
be removed before public disclosure. 

(c)  In lieu of the report required under subdivision (b),  a nonprofit hospital may elect to include 
the information regarding its charity care,  which it is required to report pursuant to 
subdivision (b),  in the nonprofit hospital's annual community benefits plan field with the office 
pursuant to Section 12 7 3 50 of the Health and Safety Code, provided that the nonprofit hospital 
submit a copy of its annual community benefits plan to the Attorney General and make the plan 
publicly available,  including by posting on an Internet Website,  except that any confidential 
patient-specific data included in the plan shall be removed before public disclosure; 

(d)  The Attorney General shall adopt necessary rules consistent with this section: 

(1)  to govern the reporting and collection of data; and 
(2)  to ensure the confidentiality of any patient-specific data. 

(e)  The Attorney General shall enter into an interagency agreement with the office relating to 
the reporting and collection of data under subdivisions (a),  (b)  and (c),  and the adoption of rules 
under subdivision (d). 

(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the Attorney General from requiring nonprofit 
hospitals to provide additional information regarding their charitable activities,  or preclude the 
Attorney General from entering into interagency agreements with other agencies and 
departments regarding the reporting,  collection and analysis of data relating to charity care. 

6 

5943.  Penalties. 

(a)  The Attorney General may assess a civil penalty against a nonprofit hospital that fails to 
make a report of charity care that complies with the requirements of this chapter or regulations 
promulgated pursuant to this chapter.  The penalty may not exceed $1,000 for each day a 
compliant report is delinquent after the date on which the report is due,  up to a maximum of 
$300,000.  No penalty may be assessed against a hospital under this section until10 business 
days have elapsed after written notification to the hospital of its failure to file a compliant 
report,  and no penalty may be assessed if the nonprofit hospital submits the required report 
within those 10 business days. 

(b)  A nonprofit hospital may petition the Attorney General for reconsideration of the assessment 
of a civil penalty under this section.  The Attorney General shall promulgate regulations 
governing the review, acceptance, and denial of such petitions. 

5944.  Enforcement; Rights and Remedies. 

(a)  A nonprofit hospital that violates the provisions of Section 5941  has committed a serious 
offense within the meaning of Sections 6511(a)(1) and 8511(a)(l) that is also a ground for 
forfeiture of corporate existence within the meaning of Sections 6511 (a)(3)  and 8511 (a)(3 ). 

(b)  In addition to any other enforcement actions available under the law,  and notwithstanding 
any other provision of law,  the Attorney General may bring or intervene in a civil action for a 
violation of this chapter for civil penalties as provided in Section 5943 and for appropriate 
equitable relief including,  but not limited to,  revocation of a hospital's status as a nonprofit 
corporation under Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation  Code and revocation of nonprofit 
corporate status under this part of Part 4.  In  the event that a nonprofit corporation seeks to 
change its status to a for-profit corporation as a result of such revocation,  the corporation shall 
be required to distribute all of its charitable assets in accordance with their charitable purposes 
with the approval of the Attorney General and:  (1)  the provisions of Sections 5813.5 and 
Article 2 of Chapter 9 of Part 2 of Division 2 of Title 1 shall apply; and (2)  except with respect 
to an agreement or transaction subject to Section 5914 or 5920,  Section 5913 shall apply. 

(c)  The rights and remedies provided for in this chapter shall not limit,  affect, change,  or repeal 
any statutory or common-law rights or remedies. 

5945.  Supervision by Attorney General. 

(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law or any provision in a nonprofit corporation's 
charter or bylaws,  the Attorney General may,  to promote the purposes of this chapter,  appoint 
any person to serve as the Attorney General's representative on the board of directors of any 
nonprofit hospital that fails to comply with Section 5941,  and has not been excused from 
compliance in accordance with subdivision (f)  of Section 5941 and has not notified the Attorney 
General of its intent to cure a miscalculation in accordance with subdivision (e)  of Section 5941; 
provided that this section shall not apply to nonprofit hospitals organized as,  or owned and 

7 

operated by,  a nonprofit religious corporation,  as defined in Section 5061,  or a nonprofit foreign 
corporation,  as defined in Section 5053. 

(b)  A person appointed to the board of directors of any nonprofit hospital under subdivision (a) 
shall serve for a term of years set by the Attorney General and shall have all the rights, powers, 
and duties as other members of the board of directors.  At no time shall more than one person 
serve as a representative of the Attorney General on any nonprofit hospital's board. 

(c)  The Attorney General shall remove a person appointed to  the hospital's board of directors 
under subdivision (a)  if the Attorney General determines that the appointment is no longer 
necessary or reasonable to achieve the purposes of this chapter.  A nonprofit hospital may 
petition the Attorney General to remove a person appointed to the hospital's board of directors 
under subdivision (a).  The Attorney General shall grant such a petition if the appointment is no 
longer necessary or reasonable to  achieve the purposes of this chapter.  The Attorney General 
may promulgate regulations governing the processing and approval and denial of such petitions. 

5946.  Charity Care Designation. 

(a)  Any patient, state taxpayer or nonprofit hospital may file a request that the Attorney General 
review costs a nonprofit hospital has designated as charity care in order to satisfy the 
requirements of Section 5941.  The requestfor review shall state the reasons the requestor 
believes that a nonprofit hospital has identified costs as charity care that do not satisfy the 
definition of charity care provided in subdivision (b)  of Section 5940.  The Attorney General 
shall make any requests for review filed pursuant to this subdivision publicly available. 

(b)  If a request for review raises a significant question regarding whether some or all of the 
costs a nonprofit hospital has identified as charity care are properly designated as charity care, 
the Attorney General shall grant the request for review.  In assessing whether a request for 
review raises a significant question,  the Attorney General may consider the amount of costs at 
issue and whether the question is one that may affect other nonprofit hospitals' calculations of 
charity care.  The Attorney General shall notifY the public,  the requestor,  and the nonprofit 
hospital whose costs are the subject of the request for review of its decision to grant or deny a 
request for review. 

(c)  Upon granting a request for review,  the Attorney General shall hold a public comment 
period on the requestfor review.  The public comment period shall last 45 days,  beginning on 
the date of the public notice provided under subdivision (b),  unless the Attorney General notifies 
the public that the public comment period is extended for any reason. 

(d)  Within  45 days of completion of the public comment period,  the Attorney General shall issue 
a determination addressing whether the costs that are the subject of the request for review are 
properly designated as charity care pursuant to this chapter. 

(e)  A patient, state taxpayer or nonprofit hospital may ask the Attorney General for an opinion 
regarding whether a particular cost properly is designated as charity care in accordance with 

8 

subdivision (b)  of Section 5940.  The Attorney General shall publish any opinions issued 
pursuant to this subdivision. 

(f)  Any public notice required by this section shall be posted on the Attorney General's Internet 
Website and distributed to the major statewide media and to any member of the public who 
requests placement on a mailing list or electronic mail to receive the notice. 

5947.  The Attorney General may assess reasonable fees on nonprofit hospitals in amounts 
designed to cover the costs incurred in processing petitions pursuant to subdivision (f) of 
Section 5941,  administering the reporting and collection of data pursuant to Section 5942, 
processing petitions pursuant to subdivision (b)  of Section 5943,  and appointment of 
representatives pursuant to Section 5945.  The Attorney General may assess reasonable fees on 
.filers of requests for review pursuant to Section 59 56 in amounts designed to cover the costs 
incurred in processing such requests. 

5948.  The Attorney General may adopt regulations implementing this chapter. 

5949.  This chapter shall remain in effect only until December 31,  2021,  and as of that date is 
repealed,  unless a later enacted statute,  which is enacted before December 31,  2021,  deletes or 
extends that date. 

SEC. 4. 

Section 504 7.5  of the Corporations Code is amended to read: 

5047.5 

(a)  The Legislature finds and declares that the services of directors and officers of nonprofit 
corporations who serve without compensation are critical to the efficient conduct and 
management of the public service and charitable affairs of the people of California.  The 
willingness of volunteers to offer their services has been deterred by a perception that their 
personal assets are at risk for these activities.  The unavailability and unaffordability of 
appropriate liability insurance makes it difficult for these corporations to protect the personal 
assets of their volunteer decisionmakers with adequate insurance.  It is the public policy of this 
state to provide incentive and protection to the individuals who perform these important 
functions. 

(b)  Except as provided in this section, no cause of action for monetary damages shall arise 
against any person serving without compensation as a director or officer of a nonprofit 
corporation subject to Part 2 (commencing with Section 511 0), Part 3 (commencing with 
Section 711 0), or Part 4 (commencing with Section 911 0) of this division on account of any 
negligent act or omission occurring (1) within the scope of that person's duties as a director 
acting as a board member, or within the scope of that person's duties as an officer acting in an 
official capacity; (2) in good faith;  (3) in a manner that the person believes to be in the best 
interest of the corporation; and (4) is in the exercise of his or her policymakingjudgment. 

9 

(c)  This section shall not limit the liability of a director or officer for any of the following: 

(1)  Self-dealing transactions, as described in Sections 5233  and 9243. 
(2)  Conflicts of interest, as described in Section 7233. 
(3)  Actions described in Sections 5237, 5944, 7236, and 9245. 
( 4)  In the case of a charitable trust, an action or proceeding against a trustee brought by a 

beneficiary of that trust. 

(5)  Any action or proceeding brought by the Attorney General. 
( 6)  Intentional, wanton, or reckless acts, gross negligence, or an action based on fraud, 

oppression, or malice. 

(7)  Any action brought under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 16700) of Part 2 of 

Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code. 

(d)  This section only applies to nonprofit corporations organized to provide religious, charitable, 
literary, educational, scientific, social, or other forms of public service that are exempt from 
federal income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code. 

(e)  This section applies only if the nonprofit corporation maintains a liability insurance policy 
with an amount of coverage of at least the following amounts: 

(1)  If the corporation's annual budget is less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the 

minimum required amount is five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). 

(2)  If the corporation's annual budget equals or exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the 

minimum required amount is one million dollars ($1,000,000). 

This section applies only if the claim against the director or officer can also be made directly 
against the corporation and a liability insurance policy is applicable to the claim.  If that policy is 
found to cover the damages caused by the director or officer, no cause of action as provided in 
this section shall be maintained against the director or officer. 

(f)  For the purposes of this section, the payment of actual expenses incurred in attending 
meetings or otherwise in the execution of the duties of a director or officer shall not constitute 
compensation. 

(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the liability of a nonprofit corporation for 
any negligent act or omission of a director, officer, employee, agent, or servant occurring within 
the scope of his or her duties. 

(h)  This section does not apply to any corporation that unlawfully restricts membership, 
services, or benefits conferred on the basis of political affiliation, age, or any characteristic listed 
or defined in subdivision (b) or (e) of Section 51  of the Civil Code. 

(i)  This section does not apply to any volunteer director or officer who receives compensation 
from the corporation in any other capacity, including, but not limited to, as an employee. 

SEC. 5. 

Section 9230 of the Corporations Code is amended to read: 

10 

9230.(a)  Except as the Attorney General is empowered to act in the enforcement of the criminal 
laws of this state, and except as the Attorney General is expressly empowered by 
subdivisions (b), (c), and (d), and Chapter 9. 5 (commencing with Section 5490) of Part 2,  the 
Attorney General shall have no powers with respect to any corporation incorporated or classified 
as a religious corporation under or pursuant to this code. 

(b)  The Attorney General shall have authority to institute an action or proceeding under 
Section 803 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to obtain judicial determination that a corporation is 
not properly qualified or classified as a religious corporation under the provisions of this part. 

(c)  The Attorney General shall have the authority (1) expressly granted with respect to any 
subject or matter covered by Sections 9660 to 9690, inclusive; (2) to initiate criminal procedures 
to prosecute violations of the criminal laws, and upon conviction seek restitution as punishment; 
and (3) to represent as legal counsel any other agency or department of the State of California 
expressly empowered to act with respect to the status of religious corporations, or expressly 
empowered to regulate activities in which religious corporations, as well as other entities, may 
engage. 

(d)  Where property has been solicited and received from the general public, based on a 
representation that it would be used for a specific charitable purpose other than general support 
of the corporation's activities, and has been used in a manner contrary to that specific charitable 
purpose for which the property was solicited, the Attorney General may institute an action to 
enforce the specific charitable purpose for which the property was solicited; provided ( 1) that 
before bringing such action the Attorney General shall notify the corporation that an action will 
be brought unless the corporation takes immediate steps to correct the improper diversion of 
funds,  and (2) that in the event it becomes impractical or impossible for the corporation to devote 
the property to the specified charitable purpose, or that the directors or members of the 
corporation in good faith expressly conclude and record in writing that the stated purpose for 
which the property was contributed is no longer in accord with the policies of the corporation, 
then the directors or members of the corporation may approve or ratify in good faith the use of 
such property for the general purposes of the corporation rather than for the specific purpose for 
which it was contributed. 

As used in this section, "solicited from the general public" means solicitations directed to the 
general public, or to any individual or group of individuals who are not directly affiliated with 
the soliciting organization and includes, but is not limited to, instances where property has been 
solicited on an individual basis, such as door to door, direct mail, face to face, or similar 
solicitations, as well as solicitations on a more general level to the general public, or a portion 
thereof, such as  through the media, including newspapers, television, radio, or similar 
solicitations. 

(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any individual rights of action which were 
accorded under law in existence prior to the enactment of Chapter 1324 of the Statutes of 1980. 

11 

As used in this section, "individual rights of action" include only rights enforceable by private 
individuals and do not include any right of action of a public officer in an official capacity 
regardless of whether the officer brings the action on behalf of a private individual. 

(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require express statutory authorization by the 
California Legislature of any otherwise lawful and duly authorized action by any agency of local 
government. 

SEC. 6. 

Section 23701  of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended and renumbered to read: 

23 701.  Organizations which are organized and operated for nonprofit purposes within the 
provisions of a specific section of this article, or are defined in Section 23701h (relating to 
certain title-holding companies) or Section 23701x (relating to certain title-holding companies), 
are exempt from taxes imposed under this part, except as provided in this article or in Article 2 
(commencing with Section 23731) of this chapter, if: 

(a)  An application for exemption is submitted in the form prescribed by the Franchise Tax 
Board; and 

(b)  A filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) is paid with each application for exemption filed 
with the Franchise Tax Board after December 31, 1969; and 

(c)  The Franchise Tax Board issues a determination exempting the organization from tax. 

(d)(1)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), an organization organized and operated for 
nonprofit purposes in accordance with Section 23701a, 23701d, 23701e, 2370lf, or 23701g shall 
be exempt from taxes imposed by this part, except as provided in this article or in Article 2 
(commencing with Section 23731), upon its submission to the Franchise Tax Board of one ofthe 
following: 

(A)  A copy of the determination letter or ruling issued by the Internal Revenue Service 
recognizing the organization's exemption from federal income tax under Section 501(a) of the 
Internal Revenue Code, as an organization described in Section 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), 
or ( c )(7) of the Internal Revenue Code. 

(B)  A copy of the group exemption letter issued by the Internal Revenue Service that states that 
both the central organization and all of its subordinates are tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3), 
(c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), or (c)(7) ofthe Internal Revenue Code and substantiation that the 
organization is included in the federal group exemption letter as a subordinate organization. 

(2)(A)  Upon receipt of the documents required in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1), the 
Franchise Tax Board shall issue an acknowledgment that the organization is exempt from taxes 
imposed by this part, except as provided in this article or in Article 2 (commencing with 
Section 23731).  The acknowledgment may refer to the organization's recognition by the Internal 

12 

Revenue Service of exemption from federal income tax as an organization described in 
Section 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), or (c)(7) ofthe Internal Revenue Code and, if applicable, 
the organization's subordinate organization status under a federal group exemption letter. The 
effective date of an organization's exemption from state income tax pursuant to this subdivision 
shall be no later than the effective date of the organization's recognition of exemption from 
federal income tax as an organization described in Section 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), 
or ( c )(7) of the Internal Revenue Code, or its status as a subordinate organization under a federal 
group exemption letter, as applicable. 

(B)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, an organization formed as a 
California corporation or qualified to do business in California that, as of the date of receipt by 
the Franchise Tax Board of the documents required under paragraph (1), is listed by the 
Secretary of the State or Franchise Tax Board as "suspended" or "forfeited" may not establish its 
exemption under paragraph (1) and shall not receive an acknowledgment referred to under 
subparagraph (A) from the Franchise Tax Board until that corporation is listed by the Secretary 
of State and the Franchise Tax Board as an "active" corporation. 

(3)  If, for federal income tax purposes, an organization's exemption from tax as an organization 
described in Section 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), or (c)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code is 
suspended or revoked, the organization shall notify the Franchise Tax Board of the suspension or 
revocation, in the form and manner prescribed by the Franchise Tax Board. Upon notification, 
the board shall suspend or revoke, whichever is applicable, for state income tax purposes, the 
organization's exemption under paragraph (1). 

(4)  This subdivision shall not be construed to prevent the Franchise Tax Board from revoking 
the exemption of an organization that is not organized or operated in accordance with California 
law, this chapter, or Section 501(c)(3), (c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), or (c)(7) ofthe Internal Revenue 
Code. 

(5)  In order to qualify for and maintain tax-exempt status pursuant to this section,  a nonprofit 
hospital, as defined in subdivision (h)  of Section 5940 of the Corporations Code,  shall comply 
with the requirements of Chapter 9.5 (commencing with Section 5940) of Part 2 of Division 2 of 
Title 1 of the Corporations Code. 

fS1(6)  Ifthe Franchise Tax Board suspends or revokes the exemption of an organization 
pursuant to paragraph (3),  ef (4), or (5),  the exemption shall be reinstated only upon compliance 
with this section, regardless of whether the organization can establish exemption under 
paragraph (1 ). 

(e)  This section shall not prevent a determination from having retroactive effect and does not 
prevent the issuance of a determination with respect to a domestic organization which was in 
existence prior to January 1,  1970, and exempt under prior law without the submission of a 
formal application or payment of a filing fee.  For the purpose of this section, the term 
"domestic" means created or organized under the laws of this state. 

13 

(f)  The Franchise Tax Board may prescribe rules and regulations to implement the provisions of 
this article. 

SEC. 7.  Amendment. 

Pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 10 of Article II of the California Constitution, this 

act may be amended either by a subsequent measure submitted to a vote of the people at a 
statewide election; or by statute validly passed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor, 
but only to further the purposes of the act. 

SEC. 8.  Severability. 

It is the intent of the People that the provisions of this act are severable and that if any 

provision of this act or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such 
invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this act which can be given effect 
without the invalid provision or application. 

14 

