Office of the Attorney General 
ATTN:  Initiative Coordinator 
P. 0. Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA  94244-2550 

Attorney General of California: 

1  5  - 0  1 0  6 

~CEIVfo 

NOV  0 9 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

This note is a written request for a circulating title and summary for the attached proposed 
initiative measure,  1000% Political Sales Tax on  Large Campaigns. 

I've enclosed a check for $200. 

Further, here are my required  attestations. 

I,  Terrance Lynn,  declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United States,  18 
years of age or older, and a resident of S 

teo county, California. 

I,  Terrance Lynn, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section  18650 of the 
Elections Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on  an  initiative petition to  be used 
for any purposes other than qualification of the proposed measure for the ballot.  I certify that I 
will not knowingly or willfully allow the signatures for this initiative to be used for any purpose 
other than qualification of the measure for truh ~~~:::::::=::flllliii~~" 

For more information about this initiative and as my public contact information, please visit my 
website www.theTerryLynn.com.  My email is contact@theTerrylynn.com.  My address is 165 
Georgia Lane,  Portola Valley,  California 94028'. 

· 

··. 

Regards, 
Terrance Lynn 

1 5  - 0  1 0  6 

1000% Sales Tax on Large Campaign Political Advertisements in California 

This initiative amends the California Constitution, Article 13, Section 35,  (b). 

It adds a section 3 as follows: 

"For the privilege of influencing public elections and  political issues,  a sales tax of 1,000% (one 
thousand percent) is hereby imposed upon Political Advertisements.  The proceeds of which 
shall solely benefit California public education.  There shall  be no further exemptions to this tax 
except as federally required  or as passed by a California ballot initiative .. 

Political Advertisements shall  mean any political advertising delivered within the state of 
California.  This is applicable to both cash and  barter transactions.  This includes but is not 
limited to all  media spending by political  parties,  political action committees or candidates. 

This sales tax will not apply to the first $1,000,000 (one million dollars) of spending within a 
calendar year by any tax entity.  However,  if a group of tax entities are controlled or coordinated 
then this first one million dollar of sales tax relief shall only apply to the group of entities and  not 
to the individual entities. 

If a Federal District Court or Supreme Court of the United States find this tax to be too high, then 
this law shall  immediately ratchet down to the highest acceptable level and remain  in  place. 

