1 5  - o 1 o 5  Arndt#  I 

El 

DEC  O 8 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

A HORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

VIA Messenger 

December 8, 2015 

. 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure -Raise California's Wage and 
Paid Sick Days Act of 2016 (15-0105) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

As you know, Bruce Michael Boyer and Shonda Roberts serve as proponents for the "Raise 
California's Wage and Paid Sick Days Act of 2016.'' On their behalf, I am enclosing the 
, following documents: 

•  The amended text of "Raise California's Wage and Paid Sick Days Act of 2016" 
•  A red-lined version showing the changes made in the amended text 
•  Signed authorizations from Mr. Boyer and Ms. Roberts for the submission of the 

amended text together with their requests that the Attorney General's Office prepare a 
circulating title and summary using the amended text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this proposed initiative to me 
at the address listed below: 

· 

California State Council of Service Employees 
3055 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 1050 
Los Angeles, CA 90010 
(213) 368-7400 

Sincerely, 

Jon Youngdahl 

VIA MESSENGER 

December 4, 2015 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to Raise California's Wage and Paid Sick Days Act of2016 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On November 3, 2015 I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "Raise California's Wage 
and Paid Sick Days Act of 2016" ("Initiative") and a request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary pursuant to section 10( d) of Article II of the California 
Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), I hereby submit timely amendments to 
the text of the Initiative.  As the proponent of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the 
amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably germane to the 
theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative. I request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Bruce Michael Boyer 

VIA MESSENGER 

December 4, 2015 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to Raise California's Wage and Paid Sick Days Act of2016 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On November 3, 2015 I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "Raise California's Wage 
and Paid Sick Days Act of2016" ("Initiative") and a request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary pursuant to section 10( d) of Article II of the California 
Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), I hereby submit timely amendments to 
the text of the Initiative.  As the proponent of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the 
amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably germane to the 
theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative. I request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Shonda Roberts 

1  5  - o 1 o s  Arndt.#  J 

SEC 1. 

Name. 

This measure shall be known and may be cited as the "Raise California's Wage and Paid 

Sick Days Act of 2016." 

SEC2. 

Findings and Declarations. 

(a)  Income inequality is a serious economic and social problem facing the State of California. 

Many Californians work full-time jobs, but earn too little to provide their families with 
housing, groceries, medical care, and other life necessities. 

(b)  The people of California need and deserve to earn fair pay for their work so they can keep up 

with rising costs and support their families. 

( c)  Most workers including restaurant, retail, in-home support services, and others need 
occasional time off to care for their own health needs and those of family members. 

( d)  When employees do not receive a fair wage, or guaranteed paid sick leave, the State of 
California and its taxpayers bear costs in the form of increased demand for emergency 
medical services, homeless shelters, and other necessary services. 

( e)  The State of California has an interest in promoting the health, safety, and welfare of 

workers, and their families and communities, by ensuring a fair wage for their work and 
access to paid sick leave. 

SEC 3.  Purpose and Intent 

(a) The chief purpose and intent of this measure is to provide more economic security for 

California workers by increasing the minimum wage and requiring employers to provide 
additional guaranteed paid sick leave so that all workers, including providers of in-home 
supportive services, will suffer no loss of minimum compensation when it becomes 
necessary to take a limited amount of time off as fully paid sick leave. 

(b)  This measure is intended to increase minimum wage and compensation standards for 

purposes of enabling California workers to support themselves and their families. 

( c)  This measure will sustain the economic security of California workers over time by requiring 

annual increases in the minimum wage, including adjustments for inflation beginning in 
2022, and requiring employers to provide no less than 48 hours or six days of paid sick leave 
to workers during every year of employment. 

· 

( d) This measure ensures that providers of in-home supportive services are eligible for paid sick 
leave at the same rates and for the same purposes as most other California employees.  This 

1 

requirement will guarantee that in-home caregivers are treated equally with other California 
workers by making them eligible for the same minimum wage and compensation standards. 

SEC 4.  Section 1182.12 of the Labor Code is amended to read: 

1182.12. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, on and after July 1, 2014, the 
minimum wage for all industries shall not be less than nine dollars ($9) per hour, and on and 
after January 1, 2016, the minimum wage for all industries shall not be less than ten dollars ($10) 
per hour. 

(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, the minimum wage for all industries shall 
not be less than the rates set forth in this subdivision. 

(1)  Employers with twenty-six (26) or more employees shall pay employees a wage ofno 

less than the following hourly rates: 

(A)  On July 1, 2017. the minimum wage shall be $12.00 per hour 
(B)  On July 1, 2018, the minimum wage shall be $13.25 per hour 
(C)  On July 1, 2019, the minimum wage shall be $14.25 per hour 
(D)  On July 1, 2020, the minimum wage shall be $15.00 per hour. 

(2)  Employers with twenty-five (25) or fewer employees shall pay employees a wage of 

no less than the following hourly rates: 

(A) On July 1, 2017, the minimum wage shall be $10.50 per hour 
(B) On July 1, 2018, the minimum wage shall be $12.00 per hour 
(C) On July 1, 2019, the minimum wage shall be $13.25 per hour 
(D) On July 1, 2020, the minimum wage shall be $14.25 per hour 
(E) On July 1, 2021, the minimum wage shall be $15.00 per hour. 

(3)  Beginning July l, 2022, and each year thereafter on July l, the minimum wage shall 

increase by an amount corresponding to the prior calendar year's increase in the 
California Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers or, if 
that index ceases to exist, the most comparable successor index. Beginning January 1, 
2022 and continuing each year thereafter no later than January l, the Department of 
Industrial Relations or an agency designated by the Department shall determine the 
adjusted rates which shall take effect the following July 1.  The minimum wage may 
be rounded off to the nearest five cents ($0.05). 

(c)  The number of employees employed by an employer shall be determined by calculating all 
individuals performing work for the employer in California for compensation on a full-time, 
part-time, or temporary basis, including individuals made available to work through the services 
of a temporary services or staffing agency or similar entity, during the prior calendar quarter. 

2 

(d)  If a local jurisdiction establishes a minimum wage that exceeds the state minimum wage 
established by this section, the minimum wage established by the local jurisdiction shall be the 
minimum wage required to be paid by employers in the local jurisdiction. 

(e) This section shall not be construed to allow a reduction in the minimum wage, to preclude an 
increase of the minimum wage that is greater than the rates calculated in subdivision (b), or to 
preempt, limit or otherwise restrict any other law, regulation, requirement, policy, or standard 
providing for higher wages or greater protections, or the exercise of local police powers pursuant 
to Section 1205(b) of the Labor Code. 

SEC 5.  Section 246 of the Labor Code is amended to read: 

246.  (a) An employee who, on or after July 1, 2015, works in California for the same employer 
for 30 or more days within a year from the commencement of employment is entitled to paid sick 
days as specified in this section. 

(b) (1) An employee shall accrue paid sick days at the rate of not less than one hour per every 30 
hours worked, beginning at the commencement of employment or the operative date of this 
article, whichever is later, subject to the use and accrual limitations set forth in this section. 

(2) An employee who is exempt from overtime requirements as  an administrative, 

executive, or professional employee under a wage order of the Industrial Welfare Commission is 
deemed to work 40 hours per workweek for the purposes of this section, unless the employee's 
normal workweek is less than 40 hours, in which case the employee shall accrue paid sick days 
based upon that normal workweek. 

(3) An employer may use a different accrual method, other than providing one hour per 

every 30 hours worked, provided that the accrual is on a regular basis so that an employee has no 
less than 24 hours of accrued sick leave or paid time off by the  I 20th calendar day of 
employment BF and no less than 48 hours of accrued sick leave or paid time off by the 240th 
calendar day of employment during each calendar year, or in e~ch 12-month period. 

( 4) An employer may satisfy the accrual requirements of this section by providing not 

less than 24 hours or three days of paid sick leave that is available to the employee to use by the 
completion of his or her 120th calendar day of employment and no less than 48 hours or six days 
of paid sick leave by the 240th calendar day of employment during each calendar year, or in each 
12-month period. · 

( c) An employee shall be entitled to use accrued paid sick days beginning on the 90th day of 
employment, after which day the employee may use paid sick days as they are accrued. 

( d) Accrued paid sick days shall carry over to the following year of employment. However, an 
employer may limit an employee's use of accrued paid sick days to 24  hours or three days 48 
hours or six days in each year of employment, calendar year, or 12-month period. This section 
shall be satisfied and no accrual or cany over is required if the full amount ofleave is received at 

3 

the beginning of each year of employment, calendar year, or 12-month period. The term "full 
amount of leave" means three days or 24  hours 48 hours or six days. 

( e) An employer is not required to provide additional paid sick days pursuant to this section if the 
employer has a paid leave policy or paid time off policy, the employer makes available an 
amount of leave applicable to employees that may be used for the same purposes and under the 
same conditions as specified in this section, and the policy satisfies one of the following: 

(1) Satisfies the accrual, carry over, and use requirements of this section. 

(2) Provided paid sick leave or paid time off to a class of employees before January 1, 

2015, pursuant to a sick leave policy or paid time off policy that used an accrual method different 
than providing one hour per 30 hours worked, provided that the accrual is on a regular basis so 
that an employee, including an employee hired into that' class after January 1, 2015, has no less 
than one day or eight hours of accrued sick leave or paid time off within three months of 
employment of each calendar year, or each 12-month period, and the employee was eligible to 
earn at least three days or 24  hours 48 hours or six days of sick leave or paid time off within nine 
months of employment. If an employer modifies the accrual method used in the policy it had in 
place prior to January 1, 2015, the employer shall comply with any accrual method set forth in 
subdivision (b) or provide the full amount of leave at the beginning of each year of employment, 
calendar year, or 12-month period. This section does not prohibit the employer from increasing 
the accrual amount or rate for a class of employees covered by this subdivision. 

(3) Notwithstanding any other law, sick leave benefits provided pursuant to the 

provisions of Sections 19859 to 19868.3, inclusive, of the Government Code, or annual leave 
benefits provided pursuant to the provisions of Sections 19858.3 to 19858.7, inclusive, of the 
Government Code, or by provisions of a memorandum of understanding reached pursuant to 
Section 3517.5 that incorporate or supersede provisions of Section 19859 to 19868.3, inclusive, 
or Sections 19858.3 to 19858.7, inclusive of the Government Code, meet the requirements of this 
section. 

(f) (1) Except as specified in paragraph (2), an employer is not required to provide compensation 
to an employee for accrued, unused paid sick days upon termination, resignation, retirement, or 
other separation from employment. 

(2) If an employee separates from an employer and is rehired by the employer within one 

year from the date of separation, previously accrued and unused paid sick days shall be 
reinstated. The employee shall be entitled to use those previously accrµed and unused paid sick 
days and to accrue additional paid sick days upon rehiring, subject to the use and accrual 
limitations set forth in this section. An employer is not required to reinstate accrued paid time off 
to an employee that was paid out at the time of termination, resignation, or separation of 
employment. 

(g) An employer may lend paid sick days to an employee in advance of accrual, at the 
employer's discretion and with proper documentation. 

4 

(h) An employer shall provide an employee with written notice that sets forth the amount of paid 
sick leave available, or paid time off leave an employer provides in lieu of sick leave, for use on 
either the employee's itemized wage statement described in Section 226 or in a separate writing 
provided on the designated pay date with the employee's payment of wages. If an employer 
provides unlimited paid sick leave or unlimited paid time off to an employee, the employer may 
satisfy this section by indicating on the notice or the employee's itemized wage statement 
"unlimited." The penalties described in this article for a violation of this subdivision shall be in 
lieu of the penalties for a violation of Section 226. This subdivision shall apply to employers 
covered by Wage Order 11  or 12 of the Industrial Welfare Commission only on and after January 
21, 2016. 

(i) An employer has no obligation under this section to allow an employee's total accrual of paid 
sick leave to exceed 48 hours or 6 days, provided that an employee's rights to accrue and use 
paid sick leave are not limited other than as allowed under this section. 

G) An employee may determine how much paid sick leave he or she needs to use, provided that 
an employer may set a reasonable minimum increment, not to exceed two hours, for the use of 
paid sick leave. 

(k) For the purposes of this section, an employer shall ·calculate paid sick leave using any of the 
following calculations: 

(1) Paid sick time for nonexempt employees shall be calculated in the same manner as the 

regular rate of pay for the workweek in which the employee uses paid sick time, whether or not 
the employee actually works overtime in that workweek. 

(2) Paid sick time for nonexempt employees shall be calculated by dividing the 

employee's total wages, not including overtime premium pay, by the employee's total hours 
worked in the full pay periods of the prior 90 days of employment. 

(3) Paid sick time for exempt employees shall be calculated in the same manner as the 

employer calculates wages for other forms of paid leave time. 

(1) If the need for paid sick leave is foreseeable, the employee shall provide reasonable advance 
notification. If the need for paid sick leave is unforeseeable, the employee shall provide notice of 
the need for the leave as soon as practicable. 

(m) An employer shall provide payment for sick leave taken by an employee no later than the 
payday for the next regular payroll period after the sick leave was taken. 

(n)  Amendments to this section made by the Raise California's Wage and Paid Sick Days Act of 
2016 shall take effect on January 1, 2017. 

SEC. 6.  Article 4 of Chapter 1, Part 1 of Division 2 of the Labor Code is added to read: 

5 

Article 4.  Paid Sick Leave for Providers of In-Home Supportive Services 

274.  The provisions of this article are in addition to and independent of any other rights, 
remedies, or procedures available under any other law and do not diminish, alter, or negate 
any other legal rights, remedies, or procedures available to an aggrieved person. 

275.  As used in this article: 

(a)  "Employer ofrecord" means a county Public Authority established or nonprofit consortium 
contracted pursuant to Section 12301.6 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, or the California In.(cid:173)
Home Supportive Services Authority established pursuant to Section 6531.5 of the Government 
Code, or their successors. 

(b)  "Family member" means any of the following: 

(1) A child, which for purposes of this article means a biological, adopted, or foster child, 
stepchild, legal ward, or a child to whom the provider stands in loco parentis. This definition of a 
child is applicable regardless of age or dependency status. 

' 

(2) A biological, adoptive, or foster parent, stepparent, or legal guardian of a provider or 
the provider's spouse or registered domestic partner, or a person who stood in loco parentis when 
the provider was a minor child. 

(3)  A spouse. 

( 4)  A registered domestic partner. 

(5)  A grandparent. 

( 6)  A grandchild. 

(7)  A sibling. 

( c)  "Paid sick leave" means time that a provider is not required to work for reasons specified in 
subdivision (a) of Section 277 but is nevertheless compensated at the same wage as the provider 
normally earns during regular work hours. 

(d) "Provider" means a provider of In-Home Supportive Services under Article 7 (commencing 
with Section 12300) of Chapter 3 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 

276.  Beginning January 1, 2018, a provider of in home supportive services under Article 7 
(commencing with Section 12300) of Chapter 3 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and 
Institutions Code is entitled to paid sick leave as specified in this article if the provider works for 
30 or more days within a calendar year in California as a provider where a county public 

6 

authority, contracted non-profit consortium, or the California In-Home Supportive Services 
Authority is the employer of record. 

277.  The Department of Social Services, in concert with the employers ofrecord, counties, and 
other interested parties, including recognized employee organizations representing providers, 
shall establish policies and procedures to ensure providers have access to paid sick leave subject 
to the requirements of this section. 

(a)  A provider shall be entitled to use paid sick leave upon the oral or written request of the 
provider.  Providers may use paid sick leave for the following purposes: 

(1) Diagnosis, care, or treatment of an existing health condition of, or preventive care for, 

a provider or a provider's family member. 

(2) For a provider who is a victim of domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking, the 

purposes described in subdivision (c) of Section 230 and subdivision (a) of Section 230.1. 

(b) A provider shall not be required to provide substantiation of the reasons he or she is seeking 
to use paid sick leave or, as a condition of using paid sick leave, to find a replacement provider 
to work during the time the provider uses paid sick leave. 

( c) A provider shall accrue paid sick leave at the rate of not less than one hour per every 3 0 hours 
worked, beginning at the commencement of employment or January 1, 2018, whichever is later, 
subject to the use and accrual limitations set forth in this section. 

( d) (1) An accrual method that is different from the accrual method provided in subdivision ( c) 
may be used if the accrual occurs on a regular basis so that a provider is afforded no less than 24 
hours of paid sick leave or paid time off by the 120th calendar day of employment and no less 
than 48 hours of paid sick leave or paid time off by the 240th calendar day of employment during 
each calendar year or in each 12-month period. 

(2) The accrual requirements set forth in this section may be satisfied by providing not 

less than 24 hours or three days of paid sick leave to the provider by the completion of his or her 
120th calendar day of employment and no less than 48 hours or six days of accrued paid sick 
leave or paid time off by the 240th calendar day of employment during each calendar year or in 
each 12-mohth period. 

( e) A provider shall be entitled to use accrued paid sick leave beginning on the 90th day of 
employment, after which day the provider may use paid sick leave as it is accrued. 

(f) Accrued paid sick leave shall carry over to the following year of employment. However, a 
provider's use of accrued paid sick leave may be limited to 48 hours or six days in each year of 
employment, calendar year, or 12-month period.  This section shall be satisfied and no accrual or 
carry over is required if the full amount of leave is received at the beginning of each year of 
employment, calendar year, or 12-month period. The term "full amount of leave" means 48 hours 
or six days. 

7 

(g) If providers represented by an employee organization, for purposes of meeting and conferring 
in good faith concerning wages, hours, and working conditions, are covered by provisions of a 
memorandum of understanding which establishes paid sick leave benefits that exceed the 
minimum benefits required under this section, that memorandum of understanding shall be 
controlling. 

(h)(l) Except as specified in paragraph (2), a provider is not entitled to receive compensation for 
accrued, unused paid sick leave upon termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation 
from employment. 

(2) If a provider is separated from employment and is rehired within one year from the 

date of separation, previously accrued and unused paid sick leave shall be reinstated. The 
provider shall be entitled to use those previously accrued and unused paid sick leave and to 
accrue additional paid sick leave upon rehire, subject to the use and accrual limitations set forth 
in this section. A provider is not entitled to reinstatement of accrued paid time off if the provider 
was paid for sick leave at the time of termination, resignation, or separation of employment. 

(i) Procedures established pursuant to this section may provide for the lending of paid sick leave 
to a provider in advance of accrual. 

G) A provider shall be given written notice setting forth the amount of paid sick leave available 
on the provider's itemized wage statement described in Section 226 or in a separate writing 
provided on the designated pay date with the provider's payment of wages. The penalties 
described in this article for a violation of this subdivision shall be in lieu of the penalties for a 
violation of Section 226. 

(k) A provider is not entitled to a total accrual of paid sick leave exceeding 48 hours or six days. 

(1)  A provider may determine how much paid sick leave he or she needs to use, provided that a 
reasonable minimum increment may be established, not to exceed two hours, for use of paid sick 
leave. 

(m)  For the purposes of this section, paid sick leave shall be calculated: 

(1) In the same manner as the regular rate of pay for the workweek in which the provider 

uses paid sick leave, whether or not the provider actually works overtime in that workweek; or 

(2) By dividing the provider's total wages, not including overtime premium pay, by the 

provider's total hours worked in the full pay periods of the prior 90 days of employment. 

(n) If the need for paid sick leave is foreseeable,  a provider shall give reasonable advance 
notification. If the need for paid sick leave is unforeseeable, the provider shall give notice of the 
need for leave as soon as practicable. 

8 

( o) A provider shall be paid for paid sick leave no later than the payday for the next regular 
payroll period after the paid sick leave was taken. 

(p) Hours for which a provider is compensated for paid sick leave shall not be deducted from the 
authorized service hours of any recipient who is authorized to receive .in-home services pursuant 
to Article 7 (commencing with Section 12300) of Chapter 3 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the 
Welfare and Institutions Code. 

278. (a)(l) Providers shall not be denied the right to use accrued paid sick leave, or be subject to 
discharge, threatened discharge, demotion, suspension, or in any manner discriminated against 
for using accrued paid sick leave, attempting to exercise the right to use accrued paid sick leave, 
filing a complaint with the department or alleging a violation of this article, cooperating in an 
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this article, or opposing any policy, 
practice or act that is prohibited by this article. 

(2) There shall be a rebuttable presumption of unlawful retaliation if a provider is denied 

the right to use accrued paid sick leave, or is discharged, threatened with discharge, demoted, 
suspended, or in any manner discriminated against within 30 days of any of the following: 

(A) The filing of a complaint by the provider with the Labor Commissioner 

alleging a violation of this article. 

(B) The cooperation of a provider with an investigation or pro~ecution of an 

alleged violation of this article. 

(C) Opposition by the provider to a policy, practice, or act prohibited by this 

article. 

279. (a) The Department of Social Services, in concert with the employers ofrecord, counties, 
and other interested parties, including recognized employee organizations representing providers,· 
shall establish policies and procedures to ensure that records documenting the hours worked and 
accrued paid sick leave and used by providers are maintained for a minimum of three years.  The 
Labor Commissioner is entitled to access these records pursuant to the requirements set forth in 
Section 1174 and a provider is permitted to access the records in the same manner as described 
· in Section 226. In the event the recordkeeping requirements are inadequate to demonstrate the 
amount of accrued paid sick leave available to a provider, it shall be presumed that the provider 
is entitled to the maximum number of hours accruable under this article. 

(b) Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to authorize or require maintenance of records 
documenting the purpose for which a provider requests or uses paid sick leave. 

280. (a) The Labor Commissioner shall enforce this article, including investigating an alleged 
violation, and ordering appropriate temporary relief to mitigate the violation or to maintain the 
status quo pending the completion of a full investigation or hearing. 

9 

(b )(1) If the Labor Commissioner, after a hearing that contains adequate safeguards to ensure 
that the parties are afforded due process, determines that a violation of this article has occurred, 
he or she may order any appropriate relief, including reinstatement, backpay, the payment of sick 
leave unlawfully withheld, and the payment of an additional sum in the form of an administrative 
penalty to  a provider or other person whose rights under this article were violated. 

(2) If paid sick leave was unlawfully withheld, the dollar amount of paid sick leave 

withheld from the provider multiplied by three, or two hundred fifty dollars ($250), whichever 
amount is greater, but not to  exceed an aggregate penalty of four thousand dollars ($4,000), shall 
be included in the administrative penalty. 

(3) If a violation of this article results in other harm to the provider or person, such as 
discharge from employment, or otherwise results in a violation of the rights of the provider or 
person, the administrative penalty shall include a sum of fifty dollars ($50) for each day or 
portion thereof that the violation occurred or continued, not to exceed an aggregate penalty of 
four thousand dollars ($4,000). 

( c) Where prompt compliance is not forthcoming, the Labor Commissioner may take any 
appropriate enforcement action to secure compliance, including the filing of a civil action. In 
compensation to the state for the costs of investigating and remedying the violation, the 
commissioner may order the violator to pay to the state a sum of not more than fifty dollars ($50) 
for each day or portion of a day a violation occurs or continues for each provider or other person 
whose rights under this article were violated. 

( d) A provider or other person may report to the Labor Commissioner a suspected violation of 
this article. The commissioner shall encourage reporting pursuant to this subdivision by keeping 
confidential, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, the name and other identifying 
infonnation of the provider or person reporting the violation. However, the commissioner may 
disclose that person's name and identifying information as necessary to enforce this article or for 
other appropriate purposes, upon the authorization of that person. 

( e) The Labor Commissioner or the Attorney General may bring a civil action in a court of 
competent jurisdiction against any person violating this article and, upon prevailing, shall be 
entitled to collect legal or equitable relief on behalf of the aggrieved as may be appropriate to 
remedy the violation, including reinstatement, backpay, the payment of sick leave unlawfully 
withheld, the payment of an additional sum, not to exceed an aggregate penalty of four thousand 
dollars ($4,000), as liquidated damages in the amount of fifty dollars ($50) to each provider or 
person whose rights under this article were violated for each day or portion thereof that the 
violation occurred or continued, plus, if the person has unlawfully withheld paid sick leave to  a 
provider, the dollar amount of paid sick leave withheld from the provider multiplied by three; or 
two hundred fifty dollars ($250), whichever amount is greater; and reinstatement in employment 
or injunctive relief; and further shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees and costs, provided, 
however, that any person or entity enforcing this article on behalf of the public as provided for 
under applicable state law shall, upon prevailing, be entitled only to equitable, injunctive, or 
restitutionary relief, and reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 

10 

(f) In an administrative or civil action brought under this article, the Labor Commissioner or 
court, as the case may be, shall award interest on all amounts due and unpaid at the rate of 
interest specified in subdivision (b) of Section 3289 of the Civil Code. 

(g) The remedies, penalties, and procedures provided under this article are cumulative. 

(h) No penalty or liquidated damages under this article shall be assessed due to an isolated and 
unintentional payroll error or written notice error that is a clerical or an inadvertent mistake 
regarding the accrual or available use of paid sick leave. In reviewing for compliance with this 
article, the factfinder may consider as  a relevant factor whether, prior to an alleged violation, a 
set of policies, procedures, and practices that fully comply with this  article were adopted and 
complied with. 

281.  (a) This article does not limit or affect any laws guaranteeing the privacy of health 
information, or information related to domestic violence or sexual assault, regarding a provider 
or provider's family member. That infom1ation shall be treated as confidential and shall not be 
disclosed to  any person except to the affected provider or as required by law. 

(b) This article shall not be construed to discourage or prohibit the adoption or retention of a paid 
sick leave policy more generous than the one required by this article. 

( c) This article does not impair the obligation to comply with a contract, collective bargaining 
agreement, memorandum of understanding, employment benefit plan, or other agreement 
providing more generous sick leave to a provider than required by this article. 

( d) This article establishes minimum requirements pe1iaining to paid sick leave and does not 
preempt, limit, or otherwise affect the applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, 
policy, or standard that provides for greater accrual or use of sick leave, whether paid or unpaid, 
or that extends other protections to a provider. 

SEC. 7.  Severability 

If the provisions of this act, or part thereof, are for any reason held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and 
effect and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. 

SEC. 8.  Conflicting Measures 

In the event that this measure and another measure that affects the rate of the state minimum 
wage or paid sick leave appear on the same statewide ballot, the provisions of the other measure 
or measures shall be deemed to conflict with this measure.  In the event that this measure receives 
a greater number of affirmative votes than a measure deemed to be in conflict with it, the 
provisions of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the other measure or measures shall 
be null and void. 

SEC. 9.  Amendments 

11 

Pursuant to subdivision ( c) of Section 10 of Article II of the California Constitution, this Act 
may be amended either by a subsequent measure submitted to a vote of the people at a statewide 
election or by statute validly enacted, but only to further the purposes of the Act and not to 
reduce or limit access to the minimum wage or paid sick leave benefits required by this Act. 

*  *  *  *  * 

12 

