15-0119 

VIA HAND  DELIVERY 

December 16, 2015 

Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
California Department of Justice 
P.O. Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 
(916) 445-4752 

~CEIVE() 

DEC  17 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 

Request for Title and Summary for Proposed Initiative 

www.AFPR.us 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

The undersigned on this and subsequent pages are the proponents of the attached 
initiative measure entitled "The Marijuana Control, Legalization and Revenue Act of 
2016 Version 611  Please prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purposes 
and points of the measure.  We have also included with this letter the signed statements 
required by Election Code sections 9001 and 9608, our addresses as registered to vote 
and a check for $200.00. 

· 

Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.  If you have any questions, please 
do not hesitate to contact John Lee at John@AFPR.us 

Sincerely, 

Dave Hodges  ~ MichaelGraftn 

Page 1 

The Marijuana Control, Legalization and Revenue Act 2016 - Version 6.0 

Text of Proposed Law 

15-0119 

SECTION 1. Title. This measure shall be known and may be cited as "The Marijuana Control, Legalization and Revenue 
Act." 

SEC. 2. Findings and Declarations. (1) The ''war on drugs" has  failed miserably,  imprisoned the poor and minorities, and 
handed billions of dollars to criminal cartels and gangs. (2) Taxing cannabis sales will generate hundreds of millions of 
dollars in annual revenues for the state. (3) Legalizing and regulating cannabis sales will make Californians safer by 
eliminating the dangers caused by prohibition. 

SEC. 3. A new Division 10, entitled "Cannabis Regulation and Taxation" is added to the Business and Professions 
Code, to read: 

Chapter 1. 
§ 27100. Cannabis. The social use of marijuana by adults,  21  years of age and older, including the cultivation, distribution, 
drying, farmers markets, harvesting, on-site consumption, planting, possession, possession of concentrated cannabis, 
processing, production, public events, retail sale, transportation, veterinary use, manufacture of edible products and 
manufacture of concentrated marijuana (with or without solvents), whether or not for profit,  shall be lawful in this state and 
is a matter of statewide concern. 

§ 27200. Taxes. The applicable sales and use taxes shall apply to sales of non-medical marijuana. In addition,  the 
Legislature may place an excise tax on the sale of non-medical marijuana not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the retail 
price of the products. Marijuana that is  sold for medical purposes shall not be subject to any sales, use, or excise tax. 

§ 27300. Cannabis Diversion Programs. The State shall establish and fund cannabis-only diversion programs in each 
county. 

§ 27 400. Implementation. It shall be the responsibility of the Legislature to implement any regulations necessary for this 
Act. 

§ 27500. Penalties. Violations of any statute or regulation enacted or promulgated to implement this Act shall not constitute 
a felony and shall not be punished by imprisonment. Except as otherwise authorized by law, the sale,  furnishing,  or giving 
away of any cannabis or cannabis product to any person under the age of 21  years is hereby prohibited. 

§ 27600. Local Control. A city, county, or city and county may ban,  or limit the number of, marijuana businesses within its 
boundaries, if such restriction has been placed on the ballot by petition in accordance with the procedures for an initiative, 
or by the city council or board supervisors, and approved by the voters within that jurisdiction at a statewide election held in 
November. 

SEC. 4. Liberal Construction. This Act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. 

SEC. 5. Severability. The provisions of this Act are severable. If any provision of this Act or its application is held invalid, 
that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or 
application. 

SEC. 6. Conflicting Measures. In the event that this measure and another measure or measures concerning marijuana 
appear on the same statewide election ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in 
conflict with this measure. In the event that this measure receives a greater number of affirmative votes, the provisions of 
this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the provisions of the other measure shall be null and void. 

SEC. 7. Amendment. The provisions of this Act may be amended by the Legislature to further the purposes of this Act by 
a statute passed in each house by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring. Any 
implementation legislation enacted pursuant to Section 27400 of the Business and Professions Code shall require only a 
majority vote in each house. 

SEC. 8. Legal Defense by the Attorney General. The California Attorney General shall protect and defend this Act from 
any and all challenges in the courts of any jurisdiction to final judgment. 

Page  1 of 1 

