<T·M  NI> 

1  5  - 0  1 0  4 

Amut #  I 

TACKETI MULL NICOLAI  LLP 
1295 Indiana Street 
San  Francisco, CA 94107 
P 415.445.2149 F 415.520.5914 
www.tackettmull.com 

DEC  OB  2015 

INITIATIVE COOl~DINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAt.'S OFFICE 

December 8, 2015 

Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814-2919 

RE: 

Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure 
CANNABIS CONTROL AND TAXATION ACT, No.  15-0104 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

Attached for filing please find the following documents in connection with the above-referenced 
ballot initiative measure. 

1. 
2. 
3. 

The amended text of the California Cannabis and Taxation Act 
A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended text. 
A signed authorization from the proponent for the submission of the amended text 
together with a request that the Attorney General's Office prepare a circulating 
title and summary using the amended text. 

Please continue to direct any inquiries regarding this request to me. 

<T·M+N/) 

TACKETI MULL NICOLAI  LLP 
1295 Indiana Street 
San  Francisco, CA 94107 
P 415.445.2149 F 415.520.5914 
www.tackettmull.com 

December 8, 2015 

Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814-2919 

RE:  Request to Prepare Title and Summary Using Amended Text 

CANNABIS CONTROL AND TAXATION ACT, No.  15-0104 

Dear Sirs: 

On November 3, 2015,  I,  proponent George Mull, requested that the Attorney General prepare a 
title  and  summary  for  the  CANNABIS  CONTROL  AND  TAXATION  ACT  ("Initiative"). 
Pursuant to  Elections Code  section 9002(b ),  I hereby submit timely amendments to the text of 
the Initiative.  As the proponent of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the amended text to 
the  Initiative and declare that the  amendment is reasonably germane to  the theme,  purpose and 
subject  of the  Initiative. 
I  request  that  the  Attorney  General  prepare  a  circulating  title  and 
summary using the amended Initiative text. 

Very truly yours, 

1 5  - 0  1 0  4 

Arnet#  J 

CANNABIS CONTROL AND TAXATION ACT 

The people of the State of California do enact as follows: 

SECTION 1.  TITLE. 

This act shall be known, and may be cited, as the Cannabis Control and Taxation Act. 

SECTION 2.  STATEMENT OF GENERAL PURPOSE. 

The  people  of the  State  of California  declare  their  purpose  and  intent  in  enacting  the 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act to be all of the following: 

1.  To  establish  a  fair  and  consistent  statewide  system  for  regulating,  controlling  and 
taxing cannabis activities by empowering the Board of Equalization and other state agencies to 
enact  and  enforce  regulations  governing  the  cultivation,  processing,  manufacturing,  testing, 
transportation, distribution, and sale of cannabis and cannabis products. 

2. To generate revenue for local governments and to increase funding for early childhood 
education, environmental protection and restoration, and pediatric cancer and spasticity research. 

3.  To  ensure freedom of choice for  all adult Californians by repealing existing laws that 
prohibit or punish cannabis and cannabis-related activities engaged in by persons 21  years of age 
and older. 

SECTION 3.  FINDJNGS AND DECLARATIONS. 

1.  Cannabis prohibition unnecessarily criminalizes the  activities of a substantial number 

of Californians. 

2.  Regulation  of cannabis  activities  will  ensure  greater  compliance  with  the  State's 
generally applicable  environmental,  health  and  safety laws  and  reduce the  number of nuisance 
cannabis grow sites. 

3. Regulation and tracking of cannabis activities will greatly diminish the ability of drug(cid:173)
trafficking organizations, gangs and other criminals to profit from unlawful cultivation and sales. 

4.  Statewide possession,  cultivation and commerce standards for persons 21  years of age 
and older will reduce youth access to  cannabis and provide clarity for  parents,  schools and law 
enforcement. 

5.  The  re-establishment  of lawful  cannabis  and  hemp  agriculture  in  California  will 
promote  the  economic  health  of the  State  by  creating  new jobs,  new  industries  and  new  tax 
revenues. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg.  1 of 12 

SECTION 4.  REGULATION OF CANNABIS. 

Chapter  5.5  (commencing  with  section  11300)  is  hereby  added  to  Division  10  of the 

Health and Safety Code, to read: 

Chapter 5.5. REGULATION OF CANNABIS 

11300. 

It being  a  matter  of statewide  concern,  the  State  of California  shall  have  the 
exclusive  right  and  power to  license  and  regulate  the  cultivation,  manufacture,  sale,  purchase, 
possession, distribution and transportation of cannabis and cannabis products within the state. 

11301.  For  purpose  of  this  Chapter,  the  following  terms  shall  have  the  following 

meanings: 

(a) "Board" means the State Board of Equalization. 

(b) "Cannabis" shall have the same meaning as marijuana as set forth in section 11018 of 
the  Health  and  Safety  Code  as  enacted  by  Chapter  1407  of the  Statutes  of 1972.  For  the 
purposes of this  chapter,  it does not  include  industrial  hemp,  as  defined  in  Section  11018.5,  or 
medical cannabis regulated pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Section 11362.5 of 
the Health and Safety Code) or the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act ( commencing 
at section 19300 of the Business and Professions Code). 

( c)  "Cannabis  products"  means  any  dried  flower  of the  cannabis  plant,  any  products 

containing cannabis, and any concentrated cannabis. 

(d) (1) "Control" or "controlling" means possession, direct or indirect, of the power: 

(A) To  vote 25  percent or more of any class  of the voting securities issued by a 

person. 

(B)  To  direct or cause the  direction of the management and policies of a person, 
whether  through  the  ownership  of voting  securities,  by  contract  ( other  than  a  commercial 
contract for goods or non-management services),  or otherwise provided; however,  no individual 
shall be deemed to control a person solely on account of being a director, officer, or employee of 
such person. 

(2)  For purposes  of subparagraph  (B)  of subsection  ( d)(l ),  a  person who,  directly  or 
indirectly, owns, controls, holds, with the power to vote, or holds proxies representing 10 percent 
or more of the then outstanding voting securities issued by another person, is presumed to control 
such other person. 

(3)  For  purposes  of this  chapter,  the  board  may  determine  whether  a  person  in  fact 

controls another person. 

(4) For purposes of this chapter,  a person is an "affiliate" of,  or a person is "affiliated" 
with,  another  specified  person  if it  directly,  or  indirectly  through  one  or more  intermediaries, 
controls, is controlled by or is under common control with the other specified person. 

( e) "Distributor" means a person who is engaged in the procurement, sale, or transport of 

cannabis and cannabis products purchased and sold between licensed entities. 

(t) "License" means a license issued by the board pursuant to this chapter. 

(g)  "Licensee" means  any person holding a  license  issued by the board pursuant to this 

chapter. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 2 of 12 

(h) "Manufacturer" means a cultivator of cannabis or manufacturer of cannabis products 

sold in this state. 

(i)  "Person"  includes  any  individual,  firm,  partnership,  joint  venture,  limited  liability 
company, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, 
receiver, trustee,  syndicate, this state,  any county,  city and county,  municipality, district,  or other 
political subdivision of the state, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 

G)  "Retailer" means  a person who  engages  in this  state  in the  sale of cannabis products 

directly to the public from a retail location and or by delivery. 

(k)  "Sale"  or  "sold"  means  any  transfer  of title  or  possession  for  a  consideration, 

exchange or barter, in any manner or by any means whatever. 

11302. Except as authorized by the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Section  11362.5  of 
the Health and Safety Code) or the Medical Marijuana Regulation and  Safety Act ( commencing 
at  section  19300  of the  Business  and  Professions  Code},  or  as  otherwise  herein  provided,  the 
Board  of Equalization  shall  have  the  exclusive  power  to  license  and  regulate  the  cultivation, 
manufacture,  distribution,  testing,  sale,  purchase,  possession,  transportation,  and  on-premises 
consumption  of cannabis  and  cannabis  products  in  this  State,  and  to  collect  license  fees  or 
occupation taxes on account thereof. The board shall have the power, in its reasonable discretion, 
to deny,  suspend or revoke any specific cannabis license if it shall determine that the granting or 
continuance  of such  license  would  be  contrary to  public  welfare,  or  that  a  person,  or  person 
controlling  such person,  seeking  or holding  a  license has violated  any  law prohibiting conduct 
involving moral turpitude. For purposes of this chapter, the manufacturing, possession or sale of 
cannabis shall not involve moral turpitude. 

11303. The board shall  issue licenses  for the manufacture,  distribution and retail  sale of 
cannabis and cannabis products.  The board may,  in its discretion, establish additional types and 
subclasses of licenses. A person may apply for and receive multiple licenses,  including different 
types  and  classes  of licenses.  The  board  may  also  impose  reasonable  conditions  upon  any 
license.  All  licenses  shall  be  issued  to  specific  persons  for  use  at  specific  locations  and  all 
transfers  and  changes  in  control  are  subject  to  board  investigation  and  approval  in  the  same 
manner as the initial issuance of the license. Except as authorized by the Compassionate Use Act 
of 1996 (Section  11362.5  of the Health and  Safety Code)  or the Medical Marijuana Regulation 
and  Safety Act  (commencing  at  section:  19300  of the  Business  and  Professions  Code),  or  as 
otherwise herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person other than a licensee of said board 
to manufacture, distribute, or sell cannabis or cannabis products in this State. 

11304.  (a)  The board  shall make  and prescribe reasonable rules  as may be necessary or 
proper to  carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to enable it to exercise the powers 
and  duties  conferred  upon  it  by  this  chapter,  not  inconsistent  with  any  statute  of this  state, 
including particularly this chapter and Chapter 3.5 ( commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of 
Division 3 of Title 2 of the  Government Code.  For the performance of its  duties,  the board has 
the power conferred by Sections 11180 to 11191, inclusive, of the Government Code. 

(b)  The board may prescribe, adopt, and enforce any emergency regulations as necessary 
to  implement,  administer and enforce their respective duties under this  chapter.  Any emergency 
regulation  prescribed,  adopted,  or  enforced  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  adopted  in 
accordance with Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 
of the  Government  Code,  and,  for  purposes  of that  chapter,  including  Section  11349 .6  of the 
Government Code, the adoption of the regulation is an emergency and shall be considered by the 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 3 of 12 

Office of Administrative Law as  necessary  for  the  immediate preservation of the public peace, 
health and safety, and general welfare. 

· 

( c)  Regulations  issued under this division  shall be necessary to  achieve the purposes of 
this  chapter,  based  on  best  available  evidence,  ancf  shall  mandate  only  commercially  feasible 
procedures, technology,  or other requirements, and shall not unreasonably restrain or inhibit the 
development  of  alternative  procedures  or  technology  to  achieve  the  same  substantive 
requirements, nor shall such regulations make compliance unreasonably impracticable. 

(d)  On  or before  November  1,  2017,  the  board  shall  promulgate  regulations  and  rules 
defining the licenses, and subclasses of licenses if any,  and the requirements therefore, including 
the  adoption  of license  application  forms  and  materials.  On  or before  December  1,  2017,  the 
board shall begin to accept license applications for the manufacture, distribution and retail sale of 
cannabis and cannabis products. 

( e) Upon the denial of any application for a license, the board shall so notify the applicant 
in writing. Within 30 days of service of such notice, the applicant may file a written petition for a 
license.  Upon receipt of a timely filed  petition, the board shall  set the petition for  hearing. The 
hearing shall be  conducted in accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with  Section  11500) of 
Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code,  and the board shall have all the powers 
granted therein. 

11305.  Cannabis  and  cannabis  products  may be  cultivated,  manufactured and  stored by 
licensees  on premises zoned for  agricultural,  manufacturing or industrial use,  or similar uses  or 
mixed uses,  subject to the rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter.  Retail  sales of 
cannabis and cannabis products by licensees may only occur on premises zoned for commercial, 
manufacturing  or  industrial  uses,  or  similar  uses  or  mixed  uses,  subject  to  the  rules  and 
regulations promulgated under this chapter. In accordance with, and subject to the exemptions in, 
Health  and  Safety  Code  Section  11362.768,  unless  otherwise  allowed  by  local  ordinance  no 
licensee shall operate a business for the cultivation,  distribution, manufacture,  sale,  or testing of 
cannabis or cannabis products within six hundred ( 600)  feet  of a school.  A city,  county,  or city 
and county may adopt ordinances that establish reasonable zoning regulations  for retail  sales of 
cannabis or cannabis products,  but such regulations  shall not ban such activity or unreasonably 
restrict access to cannabis or cannabis products within such jurisdiction.  No retail sales license 
shall be issued for  any premises which are located in  any city,  county,  or city and county where 
the  exercise  of the  rights  and  privileges  conferred  by the  license  is  contrary to  a  valid zoning 
ordinance of such jurisdiction unless the  premises had been used in the exercise of such rights 
and privileges at a time prior to the effective date of the zoning ordinance. 

11306. (a) No manufacturer or distributor shall sell cannabis products to any other person 

who is not licensed pursuant to this division or whose license has been suspended or revoked. 

(b)  No retailer,  distributor or manufacturer shall purchase cannabis or cannabis products 
from  a person who is not licensed pursuant to this division or whose license has been suspended 
or revoked. 

( c)  Each  separate  sale  of cannabis  or  cannabis products to,  or by,  a  retailer,  distributor, 
manufacturer,  or any other person required to  be  licensed who  is  not licensed pursuant to  this 
chapter, shall constitute a separate violation. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 4 of 12 

( d) A person engaging in commercial cannabis activity without a license required by this 
chapter  shall be  subject to  civil  penalties of up  to twice the  amount  of the  license  fee  for  each 
violation. 

(e)  No  licensee  shall  be  required  to  utilize  the  services  of a  distributor  or  third-party 

transportation company. 

(t)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of law,  any  licensee  may  sell  or  purchase 
cannabis or cannabis products to or from any person licensed pursuant to the Medical Marijuana 
Regulation and Safety Act (commencing at section 19300 of the Business and Professions Code). 

(g)  The  board  or  a  law  enforcement  agency  shall  be  authorized  to  seize  cannabis  and 
cannabis products  in  excess of the amounts  allowed for  personal or collective cultivation under 
Section 11314 if the owner does not have a valid license required under this chapter.  The board's 
seizure  of such  cannabis  and  cannabis  products  shall  comply with the  procedures  set  forth  in 
Revenue and Taxation Code, Division 2, Part 13, Chapter 7.5, commencing with section 30435. 

11307.  A person that engages in the business of manufacturing, distributing, transporting 
or selling cannabis or cannabis products in this state without a required license or after a required 
license has been suspended or revoked, and each officer of any corporation or other entity that so 
engages in  such activity,  is  guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each offense  shall be punished by a fine 
not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or imprisonment not exceeding one year in a county 
jail, or both fine and imprisonment. 

11308. The board shall develop  an electronic shipping manifest system for reporting the 
movement of cannabis and cannabis products throughout the distribution chain.  The information 
collected and maintained shall include, but not be limited to:  the names  and license numbers of 
the sender and recipient; the quantity,  or weight,  and variety of items shipped; the sales price,  if 
any; the estimated day of departure and arrival; and the actual day of arrival.  This track and trace 
database  shall be  designed to  flag  irregularities for  the board to  investigate.  Until  such time as 
the electronic shipping manifest system is operative, the board may require licensees to prepare, 
submit and maintain manifests and invoices in the manner the board shall reasonably determine. 

11309.  No  licensee  shall  transport  on  a  public  highway,  or  possess  in  a  public  place, 
cannabis or cannabis products in excess of the amounts allowed under Section 11314( d) unless in 
possession of a manifest correctly indicating the  names  and  license  numbers  of the  sender and 
recipient; the  quantity,  or weight,  and variety of items being transported; the  sales price,  if any; 
and the estimated day and time of departure and arrival. If a contemplated delivery or sale is not 
consummated  for  any  reason,  an  additional  manifest  must  be  generated  indicating  that  the 
cannabis  or  cannabis  products  are  being  returned  to  the  sender,  being  held  pending  another 
delivery  attempt,  or  are  being  redirected  to  another  recipient  licensee.  The  board  may 
promulgate different or additional regulations specifically applicable to retail delivery services. 

11310. Each  manufacturer,  distributor  and  retailer  of  cannabis  products  subject  to 
licensing  under  this  chapter  shall  maintain  accurate  and  complete  records  relating  to  the 
manufacture,  purchase  and  sale  of those  products,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  receipts, 
invoices,  and  other records  as  may be  reasonably required by the  board,  and  shall  make these 
records  available  upon  request  to  a  representative  of the  board.  The  board  may  make  such 
examinations  of  the  premises  and  the  books  and  records  of  any  person  cultivating, 
manufacturing,  distributing,  warehousing,  transporting or selling cannabis or cannabis products 
as  it may reasonably  deem  necessary  in  carrying out the  provisions  of this  chapter.  The board 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 5 of 12 

may  employ  accountants,  auditors,  investigators  and  other  expert  and  clerical  assistance 
necessary to enforce its powers and perform its duties under this chapter. 

11311. Except  as  otherwise  authorized  by  Compassionate  Use  Act  of  1996  (Section 
11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code) or other law, the sale, furnishing,  or giving away of any 
cannabis  or  cannabis  product  to  any  person  under  the  age  of 21  years  is  hereby  prohibited. 
Except as otherwise authorized by Compassionate Use Act of 1996 or other law, anyperson over 
the  age  of 18  years  and  under  the  age  of 21  years  who  attempts  to  purchase,  or  purchases, 
cannabis  products  from  a  licensee,  or  the  licensee's  agent  or  employee,  and  any  person  who 
knowingly sells, 'gives,  or in any way furnishes  cannabis products to a person over the age of 18 
years and under the age of 21  years, is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not 
to exceed two  hundred  fifty  dollars  ($250).  Except as otherwise authorized by Compassionate 
Use Act of 1996  or other law,  any person who knowingly sells,  gives,  or in any way furnishes 
cannabis  products  to  a  person  under the  age  of 18  years,  and  any  person under the  age  of 18 
years who purchases, receives or possesses any cannabis or cannabis products, shall be subject to 
the penalties set forth in Penal Code 308 as if the cannabis or cannabis products were cigarettes. 

11312.  As  of a  date  six  months  following  the  first  issuance  of a  license  pursuant  to 
Section 11303, the following code sections are hereby repealed: Health and Safety Code sections 
11054(d)(13),  11054(d)(20),  11357,  11358,  11359,  11360  and  11361. Except as  set forth  in this 
chapter, the cultivation, manufacturing,  possession and sale of cannabis,  cannabis products,  and 
industrial  hemp,  whether  for  profit  or  otherwise,  shall  not  thereafter  be  subject  to  criminal 
prohibition or prosecution, or to civil or criminal fine or forfeiture,  and any state or local law or 
ordinance that is inconsistent with this chapter is hereby preempted. 

11313. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,  cannabis and industrial hemp is each 
hereby declared to be an agricultural product and an approved food additive.  A cannabis product 
shall not be considered.a drug under Health and Safety Code Section  109925.  Section 81010 of 
the Agriculture Code is hereby repealed. 

11314. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, it shall be lawful for  any person 
over the age of twenty-one (21) to cultivate for personal use and consumption not more than six 
(6)  cannabis  plants without the necessity of obtaining or maintaining a  license from  the board. 
Any such personal cultivation taking place  upon  a  property zoned  primarily for  residential use 
must be conducted indoors or in a greenhouse structure with a locking door. 

(b)  No personal or collective cultivation in excess of twelve (12) cannabis plants shall be 
permitted  upon  a  single  parcel  unless  such  cultivation  is  licensed  by the  board  or  licensed  or 
otherwise  authorized  pursuant to  the  Compassionate  Use Act of 1996  (Section  11362.5  of the 
Health and  Safety Code)  or the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act ( commencing at 
section 19300 of the Business and Professions Code). 

(c)  For purposes  of this  chapter,  "personal  use"  means  for  the  use  of natural  persons 
involved  in  the  cultivation  of cannabis.  Cannabis  cultivated  for  personal  use  pursuant  to  this 
section may not be sold for a profit but may be shared without consideration, or in exchange for 
remuneration limited to the reasonable cost of cultivating the cannabis. 

(d)  Except  as  authorized  by  law,  no  unlicensed  person  shall  transport  on  a  public 
highway, or possess in a public place, more than six cannabis plants, three avoirdupois ounces of 
dried cannabis, and/or cannabis products containing more than six grams oftetrahydrocannabinol 
(THC). 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 6 of 12 

11315. (a)  The board shall have the power,  in its reasonable discretion, to contract with 
other  state  agencies  to  act  as  licensing  authorities,  to  screen  applicants,  to  track  and  trace 
cannabis and cannabis products, and to provide any other type of expertise or assistance that may 
be required to fulfill the board's duties under this chapter.  Such agencies may include,  but shall 
not  be  limited  to,  the  Department  of  Justice,  the  Department  of  Consumer  Affairs,  the 
Department  of Food  and Agriculture,  the  Department of Public  Health  and the  Department of 
Industrial Relations. 

(b) 

The  board  shall  convene  an  advisory  committee  to  advise  the  board  on  the 
development of standards and regulations pursuant to  this  chapter,  including best practices and 
guidelines  that  protect  public  health  and  safety  while  ensuring  a  regulated  environment  for 
commercial  cannabis  activity that does  not impose  such unreasonably impracticable barriers so 
as to perpetuate, rather than reduce and eliminate, the illicit market for cannabis. 

( c) 

The  advisory  committee  members  shall  include,  but  not  be  limited  to, 
representatives  of the  cannabis  industry,  appropriate  state and  local agencies,  and other subject 
matter  experts,  including  representatives  from  the  Department  of Alcoholic  Beverage  Control 
with  expertise  in  regulating  commercial  activity  for  adult-use  intoxicating  substances.  The 
advisory committee members shall be determined by the chairman of the board. 

11316.  The  Department  of Public  Health  shall  prescribe,  adopt  and  enforce  rules  and 
regulations governing the manufacture, packaging, testing,  labeling and storage of cannabis and 
cannabis products. 

1131 7.  The Department of Food and Agriculture shall prescribe,  adopt and enforce rules 
and regulations  governing the cultivation of cannabis,  including industrial hemp. Department of 
Food and Agriculture  regulations  shall require that  indoor and  outdoor  cannabis  cultivation by 
licensees  is  conducted  in  accordance  with  state  laws  and  best  practices  related  to  land 
conversion, grading, electricity usage, water usage, agricultural discharges, and similar matters. 

11318.  The Department of Pesticide Regulation  shall prescribe,  adopt and enforce rules 
and  regulations  concerning  the  use,  application  and  labeling  of pesticides  in  connection  with 
cannabis cultivation consistent with Division 6 ( commencing with Section 11401) and Division 7 
(commencing  with  Section  12500)  of the  Food  and  Agricultural  Code.  The  department  shall 
designate maximum tolerances for approved pesticides in harvested cannabis. 

11319. Prior to January 1, 2020, the board shall not issue or renew a license to any person 
that cannot demonstrate continuous California residency from and before January 1, 2015.  In the 
case of an  applicant or licensee that is  an entity,  the  entity shall not be considered a resident if 
any person controlling the entity cannot demonstrate  continuous California residency from  and 
before  January  1,  2015.  A  licensee  that  is  an  entity  shall  report  to  the  board the  issuance  or 
transfer  of its  stock  or  interests  to  any  person  wherein  the  issuance  or  transfer  results  in  the 
person owning  10 percent or more of the entity's stock or interests.  For purpose of this section, 
residency shall have the same meaning as that set forth in Section 12505 of the Vehicle Code. 

11320.  A holder of a manufacturer or distributor license shall not also be licensed as,  or 
be  affiliated  with  a  person  that  is  licensed  as,  a  manufacturer,  wholesaler  or  distributor  of 
distilled spirits as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23005. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 7 of 12 

11321.  A holder of a manufacturer or distributor license shall not also be licensed as,  or 
affiliated with a person that is  licensed as,  a manufacturer, wholesaler or distributor of cigarettes 
or tobacco products. 

11322.  This chapter shall not require  an  employer to permit or accommodate the use  of 
cannabis  in  the  workplace,  but  no  employer  may  terminate  an  employee,  or  take  any  other 
adverse  action  against  an  employee,  solely on the  basis  of cannabis  use  without  a  showing  of 
cannabis  impairment or possession while at work.  Notwithstanding the  foregoing,  an  employer 
contractually or statutorily required to maintain a drug-free workplace may comply with its legal 
obligations. 

11323. Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, an  action taken that is  in compliance 
with the provisions of this chapter shall not, by itself, be sufficient evidence of parental unfitness, 
or child abuse,  or  otherwise  be  used to  restrict  or  abridge  custodial or parental rights  to  minor 
children, nor the basis to diminish parental rights or remove a child from  his or her home, unless 
it  is  determined that there  exists  an  immediate and  actual threat to  the health  and  welfare  of a 
child. 

11324. The fees assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be set at an amount that will fairly 
and proportionately generate sufficient revenue to cover the costs of administering and enforcing 
this chapter and shall be deposited in the Cannabis Fund which is hereby created within the State 
Treasury.  All  moneys  collected  as  a  result  of penalties  imposed  under  this  chapter  shall  be 
deposited directly into the General Fund, to be available upon appropriation. The Controller shall 
appropriate  from  the  Cannabis  Fund  to  the  board  and  other  state  agencies  reasonable  costs  of 
implementing,  administering and  enforcing this  chapter.  Notwithstanding  Section  13340 of the 
Government  Code,  all  moneys  deposited  pursuant  to  this  chapter  shall  be  continuously 
appropriated to the board without regard to fiscal year for purposes of this chapter.  For purposes 
of the  calculations  required  by  Section  8  of Article  XVI  of the  California  Constitution,  funds 
transferred  to  the  Cannabis  Fund  shall  be  considered  General  Fund  revenues  which  may  be 
appropriated pursuant to Article XIII B. 

11325.  Funds  for  the  establishment  and  support  of the  regulatory  activities  required 
pursuant to  this  chapter shall  be  advanced as a General Fund or special fund  loan,  and  shall be 
repaid  from  the  proceeds  of the  fees  collected pursuant to  this chapter or any rule or regulation 
adopted pursuant to this chapter, on or before January 1, 2022. 

SECTION 5.  TAXATION OF CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND SALES 

Part  13 .5  ( commencing  with section  31000)  is  added to  Division 2 of the Revenue  and 

Taxation Code, to read: 

Chapter 1. 

General Provisions 

31001. This part is known and may be cited as the Cannabis Tax Law. 

Chapter 2. 

Local Cultivation Taxes 

31050.  This Chapter is  known and may be cited as  the Cannabis Local Cultivation Tax 

Law. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg.  8 of 12 

31051. The taxes imposed by this part are in lieu of all county, municipal, or district taxes 
specifically  imposed  upon  the  cultivation,  manufacture,  storage  or  distribution  of cannabis  or 
cannabis products. 

31052. Any city,  city and  county,  or county may by action of its  board of supervisors or 
city council, without action by the voters, adopt a cannabis cultivation tax in accordance with the 
provisions of this part.  Any  such cultivation tax must be based upon  plant canopy size and the 
rate of tax may not exceed two dollars  ($2.00) per square  foot  per annum.  No  such tax shall be 
imposed  upon  industrial  hemp  as  that  term  is  defined  by  Section  11018.5  of the  Health  and 
Safety Code  or upon  any  cannabis  cultivated  for  personal  use  within the  limits  set forth  in the 
Section 11314 of the Health and Safety Code. 

3105 3. The licensee shall prominently display a tax certificate issued by the board at each 
place of cannabis cultivation, which certificate shall  indicate the amount of tax assessed and the 
maximum square footage of canopy permitted. 

31054. The city, city and county, or county shall contract, prior to the effective date of its 
cannabis cultivation tax ordinance, with the  State Board of Equalization to  perform all functions 
incident to  the  administration  or  operation of its  cannabis  cultivation tax ordinance.  The  board 
shall charge a city,  city and county, or county an amount for the board's services in administering 
the  cannabis  cultivation  tax  ordinance  of the  local  entity,  as  determined  by the  board  with the 
concurrence of the Department of Finance. 

3105 5.  All  cannabis  cultivation  taxes  collected  by  the  State  Board  of Equalization 
pursuant to contract with any city,  city and county, or county shall be transmitted by the board to 
such  city,  city  and  county,  or  county  periodically  as  promptly  as  feasible.  The  transmittals 
required under this section shall be made at least once each calendar quarter. 

31056.  Any cultivation tax is a direct obligation of the manufacturer licensee and shall be 
due  and payable  in twelve  (12)  equal monthly  installments,  with each monthly installment due 
on  or  before  the  15th  day  of each  calendar  month.  Payments  may  be  made  in  cash  without 
penalty or additional fee. 

3105 7.  The board may bring such legal actions as are necessary to collect any deficiency 
in the tax required to be paid,  and,  upon the board's request, the Attorney General shall bring the 
actions. 

Chapter 3. 

Local Cannabis Sales Taxes 

31100. This Chapter is known and may be cited as the Cannabis Local Sales Tax Law. 

31101. The taxes imposed by this part are in lieu of all county, municipal, or district taxes 
on the sale of cannabis or cannabis products,  and any such existing taxes are hereby preempted. 
All sales of cannabis and cannabis products shall also be subject to taxation under the  Sales and 
Use Tax Law. If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue 
and Taxation Code, an additional permit shall not be required by this part. 

31102. Any city,  city and county,  or county may by action of its  board of supervisors or 
city council, without action by the voters,  adopt a cannabis sales and use tax in accordance with 
the provisions of this part.  The tax rate  imposed may not exceed  five  percent (5%)  of the retail 
sale amount and the amount subject to tax shall not include the amount of any sales tax or use tax 
imposed by the  State of California upon a  retailer or consumer.  No  such tax shall be  imposed 
upon industrial hemp  as that term is  defined by Section 11018.5  of the Health and Safety Code. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg. 9 of 12 

The  taxes  imposed  under  this  chapter  shall  not  apply  to  retail  sales  of medical  cannabis  or 
cannabis  products  when the  purchaser furnishes  evidence to  the  retailer that the  purchaser is  a 
person  with  an  identification  card,  or the  primary caregiver  of a person  with  an  identification 
card, as those terms are defined in Health and Safety Code section 11362.7. 

31103. The city,  city and county, or county shall contract, prior to the effective date of its 
cannabis  sales  and  use  tax  ordinance,  with  the  State  Board  of Equalization  to  perform  all 
functions  incident to the administration or operation of its cannabis sales and use tax ordinance. 
Payments may be made in cash without penalty or additional fee.  The board shall charge a city, 
city and county,  or county an amount for the board's services in administering the sales and use 
tax  ordinance  of the  local  entity,  as  determined  by  the  board  with  the  concurrence  of the 
Department  of Finance.  For purposes  of this  chapter,  the  provisions  of Section  7203.5  of the 
Revenue and Taxation Code shall not apply. 

31104.  All  cannabis  sales  and  use  taxes  collected  by the  State  Board  of Equalization 
pursuant to contract with any city,  city and county, or county shall be transmitted by the board to 
such  city,  city  and  county,  or  county  periodically  as  promptly  as  feasible.  The  transmittals 
required under this section shall be made at least once in each calendar quarter. 

31105.  The board may bring such legal actions as are necessary to collect any deficiency 
in the tax required to be paid, and, upon the board's request, the Attorney General shall bring the 
actions. 

Chapter 4. 

State Cannabis Sales Tax 

31200.  This Chapter is known and may be cited as the Cannabis Sales Tax Law. 

31201.  The taxes imposed by this part are in lieu of all state taxes specifically directed to 
the  sale  of cannabis  or  cannabis  products.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  law,  all  sales  of 
cannabis  and  cannabis  products  shall  remain  subject  to  taxation  under  the  Sales  and  Use  Tax 
Law.  If a  seller's  permit has  been  issued  to  a  retailer  under  Section  6067  of the  Revenue  and 
Taxation Code, an additional permit shall not be required by this part. 

31202. Except as  provided in section 31203, there is hereby imposed an ad valorem five 
percent (5%) tax on all retail sales of cannabis products. This tax shall be collected by the board. 
All revenues :from this tax shall be remitted by the board to the Cannabis Tax Fund. 

31203.  The taxes  imposed under this  chapter shall not apply to  retail  sales  of medical 
cannabis  or  cannabis  products  when  the  purchaser  furnishes  evidence  to  the  retailer  that  the 
purchaser is  a person with  an  identification  card,  or the  primary  caregiver of a person with an 
identification card, as those terms are defined in Health and Safety Code section 11362.7. 

33204.  All amounts required to be paid to the state under this chapter shall be paid to the 
board  in  the  form  of remittances payable to the  State Board of Equalization.  Payments may be 
made  in  cash  without  penalty  or  additional  fee.  The  board  shall  transmit  the  payments  to  the 
Treasurer to be deposited  in the  State  Treasury to  the  credit of the  Cannabis  Tax Fund,  which 
fund is hereby created. 

33205. Any person who  fails  to  pay any tax required by this  chapter shall  be  subject to 
the penalties and interest as set forth in Part 1 of Division 6 (commencing with Section 6591) of 
the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg.  10 of 12 

33206.  The Cannabis Tax Fund shall contain three  separate accounts,  which are hereby 

established, as follows: 

The  Early  Education  Account,  appropriated  by  the  Controller  to  the  Department  of 

(a) 
Education, to fund  state preschool programs that prepare children for success in school and life. 

The Environmental Restoration and Protection Account appropriated by the Controller to 
(b) 
the  State  Water  Resources  Control  Board,  the  Department  of Fish  and  Wildlife,  the  Wildlife 
Conservation  Board,  and  the  Department  of  Parks  and  Recreation  to  fund:  (i)  cleanup, 
remediation,  and restoration of environmental damage on public lands caused by illegal cannabis 
cultivation  and  related  activities,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  damage  that  occurred  prior  to 
enactment of this Act;  (ii) natural resource protection,  including acquisition of lands,  interests in 
land, and conservation easements to offset the adverse environmental impacts of illegal cannabis 
cultivation;  and  (iii)  stewardship,  operations,  maintenance,  and  restoration  of  state-owned 
wildlife habitat and units of the state park system. 

( c) 
The Pediatric Research Account,  appropriated by the  Controller to  a public university or 
universities in California, to fund research that leads to curing childhood cancers or that leads to 
curing and/or better management of childhood spasticity disorders,  including, but not limited to, 
sudden  onset  spasticity  as  well  as  preexisting  spasticity  from  spinal  injury,  brain tumor/injury, 
cerebral palsy, or multiple sclerosis. 

33207. 

(a)  The  Controller  shall  appropriate  from  the  Cannabis  Tax  Fund  for  the 
following  purposes,  before any  funds  are  disbursed pursuant to  section  33206,  in the  following 
order: 

(1) 

Reasonable costs incurred by the Board for administering and collecting the taxes 

imposed by this chapter. 

(2) 

Reasonable  costs 

incurred  by  the  licensing  authorities  for 

implementing, 
administering, and enforcing Chapter 5.5  of Division 10 of the Health and Safety Code in excess 
of the  monies  available  in  the  Cannabis  Fund  established  in  Section  11323  of the  Health  and 
Safety Code.  The  Department of Finance  shall  report to  the  Legislature annually until  2026 on 
the  fiscal condition  of  the  Cannabis  Fund  and  make  recommendations  as  appropriate  for 
legislation to ensure its stable, self-sustaining operation. 

(3) 

Research pertaining to the implementation and effect of the Cannabis Control and 

Taxation Act. 

(4) 

Funding for the California Marijuana Research Program. 

(b)  Subject to the  satisfaction of the  funding  requirements  of subdivision ( a)  of this  section, the 
Controller shall  appropriate at least annually any excess  funds  in  the  Cannabis Tax Fund to  the 
purposes set forth in Section 33206 in the following manner:. 

(1) 

Forty percent (40%) shall be deposited in the Early Education Account. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act- Amended - pg.  11  of 12 

(2) 

Forty  percent  (40%)  shall  be  deposited  in  the  Environmental  Restoration  and 

Protection Account. 

(3) 

Twenty percent (20%) shall be deposited in the Pediatric Research Account. 

( c) 
Funds  allocated  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  used  to  increase  the  funding  of the 
programs and purposes identified and shall not be used to replace allocations of other funding for 
these purposes. 

SECTION 6.  AMENDMENTS 

This Act  shall  be  broadly  construed  to  accomplish  its  purposes.  The  provisions  of this 
measure may be amended by a two-thirds vote of the members of each house of the  Legislature 
and  signed  by the  Governor  so  long  as  such  amendments  are  consistent  with  and  further  the 
intent of this Act. 

SECTION 7.  SEVERABILITY 

If any  word,  phrase,  section,  or  provision  of this  Act  or  the  application  thereof to  any 
person or circumstances is  held invalid or unconstitutional,  such invalidity or unconstitutionally 
shall not affect any other word, phrase,  section, provision, or application of this Act that may be 
given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional part, and to that end the provisions of this Act 
are  severable.  It  is  the  intent  of the  people  of the  State  of California that this Act would  have 
been adopted regardless of whether such invalid provision had not been included or such invalid 
application had not been made. 

Cannabis Control and Taxation Act-Amended - pg.  12 of 12 

