This two page document is  based on the reference given at the bottom of this page. 

To, 

Office of the Attorney General 
ATIN: Initiative Coordinator 
P.O.  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 
(916) 445-4752 /  www.oag.ca.gov 

15-0112 

El 

NOV  2 3 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDi,\1/. 
A HORNEY GENERAL'~:  . 

It  is  requested  that  a circulating  title  and  summary  of the  chief  purpose  and  points  of the  proposed 
initiative measure be  prepared. A draft of the proposed initiative measure is on the second  page. 

A check for the fee of $200 payable to State of California is included. 

I,  Subhendu  Das,  declare  under penalty of perjury that I am  a citizen  of the  United  States,  18 years  of 
age or older, and a resident of Los Angeles county, California. 

I,  Subhendu  Das,  acknowledge that it is  a misdemeanor under state law (Section  18650 of the Elections 
Code)  to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on  an  initiative  petition to be  used  for any  purpose 
other than  qualification  of the  proposed  measure  for  the  ballot.  I certify  that  I will  not  knowingly  or 
willfully allow the signatures for this initiative to be  used for any purpose other than qualification of the 
measure for the ballot. 

Please direct all correspondence at the address given below. Electronic mail will be  highly appreciated. 

(Signature of Proponent) 
Dated this 19th day of November, 2015 

Subhendu Das (Proponent), 24300 Abbeywood  Drive, West Hills, California, 91307 
Subhendu.das@excite.com 

Reference: 
[1]  2015 Statewide Initiative Guide, Secretary of State, California, www.sos.ca.gov,  pp 1-2. 

Page 1 of 2 

15-0112 

DRAFT OF A CALIFORNIA STATE WIDE INITIATIVE MEASURE 

TITLE: 

Democracy for all California Legislators in California Capitol 

SUMMARY: 

No secret ballot means no democracy. 
Therefore, all elected California Legislators must always use secret ballot for all votes. 

SCOPE: 

This initiative is meant for all decision processes used in California Capitol for making all kinds of 
rules,  regulations,  and  laws  by  all  the  elected  officials  of the  California  State  Assembly  and 
California State Senate. 

Any committee, sub-committee, team, group etc. created out of the above elected officials, will 
be subjected to this initiative. No such team can  have less than three elected members. 

Whenever and wherever there is a vote for making a decision, from any process, by such a team 
of elected officials, the vote will be subjected to this initiative. 

INITIATIVE: 

People  of  California  use  secret  ballot  to  elect  their  representatives  in  the  state  capitol. 
Democracy means  use  of secret ballot in  voting.  If people's elected  representatives cannot  use 
secret  ballot  to  vote  then  people  lose  their  secret  ballot  and  therefore  democracy.  This 
proposition wants to give that democracy to their elected representatives. 

All votes  must use  California  State  approved  secret  ballot for making all  decisions.  No  decision 
will be considered valid if it bypasses the secret ballot of the voting system. No electronic voting 
system can  be used. 

This initiative measure will amend the California Constitution. 

PROPONENT: 

Signature: 

Name: 
Postal Address: 
Email Address: 
Date: 

Subhendu Das 
24300 Abbeywood Drive, West Hills, Ca 91307, USA 
Subhendu.Das@excite.com 
19, November, 2015 

Page 2 of 2 

