1  5  - 0  1 0  8  Arndt.II/ 

E-Voting Act of 2016 

Date: Fri, December 11th 2015 

Hon. Kamala D. Harris 
Attorney General 
Attn: Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 94244-25550 

RE:  E-Voting Act of 2016 Amendments 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

DEC  1 1 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

I respectfully and formally request the amendments, enclosed, to be made to the 
active measure: The E-Voting Act of 2016. 

Any correspondence and/ or inquires regarding this matter may be addressed to: 
Chase Martinez 7145 Mariposa ave Citrus Heights, CA 95610 916-223-6976 

Your time is appreciated. 

Sincerely, 

~ -~ - - - - -

- - - - -

-----

-

- - -

-~   - - - - - - - -

- -~ · - - -

15-0108 

Arndt#  I 

E-Voting Act of 2016 

Section 1. Title 
This shall be known, and may be cited as "E-Voting Act of 2016" 

Sec. 2. Findings & Declarations 

The people of the State of California find and declare: 

1. In California the average voter is older than the average Californian, and his or her 
parents. 

2. Only 8.2  percent of Californians age 18-24 casted a ballot in November 2014 
General Election. California's youth appears to be unconcerned with matters that 
directly affect their own futures and the generations that follow. 

3. Even Californians in their mid 30s were practically nonexistent in participation;: 
furthering the gap in representation of California's constituents, as well as the need 
for not only modernization, but also education of Californians in matters of policy. 

4. The state needs a modernized voting platform. It is in the best interest of the state 
to create and maintain an online ballot system or contract with a third party to 
provide this service for Californians adding tools to further the representation of the 
States people in its system and process. Electronic balloting, voter education, and 
election night reporting was provided by one such company in over 320 
jurisdictions across the United States during the 2014 General Election. 

5. It is in the State of California and its constituent's best interest that the 
modernization of its voting system be achieved without new taxes. Funds should be 
appropriated from the $69 million remaining, as of December of 2014, from the 
Voting Modernization Act of 2002. 

(a) This measure would modernize the voting system and would therefore be 
eligible for funds appropriated from the Voting Modernization Act of 2002. 

6. Alaska, Arkansas, Kentucky, Arizona, Washington D.C.,  Mississippi, Virginia, West 
Virginia, Florida, and New York already contract for online balloting services; most, 
but not all, states listed also contracted for online balloting services to_give citizens 
of their respective states residing overseas in the military the ability to vote online. 

( a)  The system proposed should also be made available for those of California's 
constituents that are serving in the military overseas. 

7. Code visibility, network and data encryptions, along side other means of checks 
and balances shall secure all concerns. 

1 

- - - - - - - - - - -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,  ~ ~ 

---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---- - -

7. Code visibility, network and data encryptions, along side other means of checks 
and balances shall secure all concerns. 

Sec. 3. Intent & Purpose 

The people of the State of California declare their purpose and intent in enacting 
"The E-Voting Act of 2016" as follows: 

1. To work with the State of California, through means of an initiated state statute, to 
create an additional, more convenient, and accessible avenue for Californians to 
vote, including those serving in the military overseas. 

( a)  A system that will allow California's constituents the opportunity to vote from 
any device/computer if they so choose tot as current online voting encryption 
technology in the market place is compatible with Google Android™, Blackberry, and 
Apple® iOS  devices. 

(b) To allow people with varying levels of computer proficiency to vote easily 
without any additional training; an online ballot system should have the ability to be 
configured to replicate any paper style ballot. 

(c)  To provide said system in Spanish upon implementation_with other languages to 
be determined at a latter time. 

(i)  Hispanic or Latino percent in California 38.5% (2014 Census) 

3. To increase voter turn out, participation in the political process, and most 
importantly better the communication between California's representatives and 
their constituents. 

4. To promote participation, the system should allow voters to share via Facebook 
and Twitter that they voted if they so choose (modernizing the "I voted" sticker). 

5. To further demonstrate to constituents that their vote does count through means 
of real time software. 

Sec. 4. Online system & Procedure 

Section 4 is added to the government code Division 19. Chapter 2. Elections Code 
Section 19100-19105  as follows: 

a.  By December 31, 2017 The Secretary of State shall create an online ballot system, 
or contract with a third party to provide this service to Californians. The system 
shall be designed and implemented with the following requirements: 

2 

- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " - - - - - · - -----~-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - · · · - - - -

1. The system shall require 2 pins related to identifying the voter and signing for 
their ballot. Upon registration for the online ballot voters would have the ability to 
choose to receive this information via email or mail. 

(A)  Voter I.D. number (Pin 1) shall be sent upon registration for online ballot. 

(B)  Voter E-Signature (Pin 2)  a number of days before Election Day as determined 
by state. 

(i) If mail is chosen, the Voter E-Signature (Pin 2)  shall be delivered in a concealed 
manner that is tamper proof. 

(C)  Voter E-signature (Pin 2) shall be unique to each election. 

2.  Remote online voting shall be conducted in an appropriate time manner that 
allows information, such as a list of whom has voted, to be sent to the polling 
stations prior to them opening. 

3. Upon casting of online ballot voters would need both pins to navigate through the 
system. 

(a) The system shall verify the right to vote and display the corresponding ballot. 

(b)  Once a vote is cast it shall be encrypted and sent to the voting server. 

4. $45 million from the Voting Modernization Fund is hereby appropriated for this 
purpose. 

Sec. 5. Testing & Voter Assurance 

Section 5 is added to the government code Division 19. Chapter 2. Elections Code 
Section 19100-19105 as follows: 

(a) If voted into law municipal and local elections that follow 2016's general election 
will act as said environment and tests leading up to the complete roll out of the 
online ballot system by the immediate general election that follows. 

1. An electronic paper trail of voter list and voter authentication, or casting of vote, 
shall be kept and made available to the public in a manner that secures anonymity of 
the vote. 

2. The System's security protocols and procedure are to be made visible, 
transparent, and easily accessible to the public electronically. 

3 

Sec. 6. Checks & Balances 

1. The online ballot system would be best if accompanied by election night 
reporting, and a post election audit. 

Section 6 is added to the government code Division 19. Chapter 2. Elections Code 
Section 19100-19105 as follows: 

(a) The state will be responsible to work alongside the systems provider to audit its 
analysis, procedures, security, and to preserve the anonymity of the vote after the 
conclusion of each election. 

4 

