1 5 - 0  1 1 0  Arndt.#  \ 

Andrew K.  Rauch 
rauch@rauchaplc.com 

1010 Second Avenue, Suite 1770 
San  Diego, CA 92101 
Phone: (619) 515-1140 
Fax:  (619)  235-9100 

December 21, 2015 

Office of the Attorney General 
ATTN: Initiative Coordinator 
Ashley Johansson 
P.O. Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 

Re:  Request for Amendment to Proposed Initiative 

Initiative 15-0110 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

~CEIVfa 

DEC  2 3 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Pursuant California Elections Code section 9002, I am submitting the enclosed amendment 

to the initiative that I originally submitted on November 18, 2015 and which you received on 
November 19, 2015.  You assigned this initiative number 15-0110. 

This amendment is submitted within 35 calendar days following your receipt of the 

proposed measure.  The amendment is germane to the theme, purpose, or subject of the initiative 
measure as  originally proposed.  (It clarifies and improves the original language as recommended 
by other citizens of California received during the public comment period.) 

I am the only proponent of the initiative and provide my signature below, authorizing this 

amendment.  As a courtesy, I also provide a redline version showing the changes between the 
original submission and the measure, as amended. 

Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.  Should you have any questions or 

require additional information, please contact the undersigned at the address and telephone number 
listed above. 

Enclosures 

1  5  - 0  1  1  0  Arndt. :J/:  / 

INITIATIVE MEASURE {AS AMENDED) TO BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

SECTION 1.  STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE 

A.  Under California law, all persons are entitled to full and equal accommodations, advantages, 

facilities, privileges, or services in all business establishments, including both private and public 
entities.  However, oppressive lawsuits are needlessly decreasing or limiting access to public 
facilities since funds that could have been used to create greater accessibility are being taken by 
some attorneys for their excessive fees through unnecessary litigation. 

B.  To encourage greater accessibility and to ensure that compliance can be accomplished quickly, the 
People of the State of California hereby amend the law to allow remedial access corrections to be 
made without litigation and needless payments of overly burdensome attorneys' fees. 

SECTION 2.  AMENDMENT TO CONSTRUCTION-RELATED ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS 
COMPLIANCE ACT 

Section 55.535 is added to the Civil Code as follows: 

§55.535 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no construction-related accessibility claim may 
be initiated in a legal proceeding against any person, business or entity unless such person, business 
or entity has been served with a demand letter specifying each claimed violation of a construction(cid:173)
related accessibility standard and the violation has not been corrected within 120 days of the service 
of the demand letter.  Service of the demand letter shall be accomplished by any means authorized 
for service of a summons.  No person, business or entity served with a demand letter shall be liable 
for statutory damages, costs or plaintiffs attorney fees for any claimed violation of a construction(cid:173)
related accessibility standard if the violation is corrected within 120 days of service of the demand 
letter. 

SECTION 3.  GENERAL PROVISIONS 

(a) This Act is intended to be comprehensive. It is the intent of the People that in the event this Act and 

one or more measures relating to the same subject shall appear on the same statewide election ballot, the 
provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this Act. In the event that this 
Act receives a greater number of affirmative votes, the provisions of this Act shall prevail in their entirety, and 
· all provisions of the other measure or measures shall be null and void. 

(b) If any provision of this Act, or part thereof, or the applicability of any provision or part to any person 

or circumstances, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions and parts 
shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions and parts of this Act 
are severable. The voters hereby declare that this Act, and each portion and part, would have been adopted 
irrespective of whether any one or more provisions or parts are found to be invalid or unconstitutional. 

( c) This Act is an exercise of the public power of the people of the State of California for the protection 

of the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the State of California, and shall be liberally construed to 
effectuate its purposes. 

( d) Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the State, government agency, or any of its officials 

fail to defend the constitutionality of this act, following its approval by the voters, any other government 
employer, the proponent, or in his or her absence, any citizen of this State shall have the authority to intervene 
in any court action challenging the constitutionality of this act for the purpose of defending its constitutionality, 
whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, and on discretionary review by the Supreme Court of California 
and/ or the Supreme Court of the United States. The fees and costs of defending the action shall be a charge on 
funds appropriated to the Attorney General, which shall be satisfied promptly. 

