Terry Rogers 

1399 East 28th Street 
Signal Hill.,  CA  90755 

(562) 988-3106 

15-0113 

El 
NOV  3 0 2015 

!NITIATiVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

November 23,  2015 

Ms. Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
P.  0. Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA  94244-2550 

Dear Ms. Johansson, 

I am requesting the preparation of a Title and Summary for the proposed initiative constitutional 
amendment that is enclosed herewith.  Also enclosed are the required certifications regarding my 
eligibility to file the measure and  my understanding of the laws regulating the use of petition signatures. 

Thank you  in advance for your assistance. 

Sincerely, 

Proponent 

15-0113 

This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with the provisions of Article II, 
Section 8 of the Constitution. 

This initiative measure adds a section to the Constitution; therefore, new provisions proposed to 
be added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new. 

PROPOSED LAW 

Section 20 is added to Article XX of the Constitution to read: 

It is a compelling public interest for the People of California to prevent the misuse of the courts 
of record of the State by predatory lawsuits whose intent is to enrich undeserving plaintiffs and 
unscrupulous attorneys rather than to  compensate legitimately injured parties.  In accordance 
with this interest;  any complaint for an alleged violation of any law governing accessibility to 
public accommodations for people with disabilities by any business or property owner must be 
noticed to  such business or property owner no less than ninety (90)  days prior to  the filing of any 
lawsuit in a court of record of the State.  If the business or property owner so noticed cures the 
alleged violation in  accordance with the laws governing accessibility to public accommodations 
for people with disabilities within ninety (90)  days of receiving the notice,  then the basis for any 
complaint referenced in the notice shall be null and void.  Local permitting authorities,  whether 
city,  county,  or city and country,  shall give precedence to  businesses and property owners 
attempting to make alterations or repairs to  their businesses or properties in order to  comply 
with the laws governing accessibility to public accommodations for people with disabilities. 

In the event that any portion of this amendment, or the application thereof to any person or 
circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application, 
and to that end the provisions of this amendment are severable. 

