July 14, 2016 

VIA EXPRESS  MAIL 

The  Honorable Kamala  D.  Harris 
Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 1th Floor, P.O.  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

1  6  - 0  0  0  9 

RECEIVED

JUL  1 5 2016 

INITIATIVE COORDfNATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Request for Title and Summary for Proposed Referendum (Assembly Bill  No. 1511) 

Dear Ms. Harris: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 9, of the California Constitution, I hereby submit the attached proposed 
referendum (veto referendum) and request a circulating title and summary for petitions to collect 
signatures from California voters.  I have attached the complete text of the bill, which is Assembly Bill 
No.  1135. 

I, Barry Bahrami, declare under penalty of perjury that I am  a citizen of the United States, 18 years of 
age  or older, and a resident of (insert county), California." (Elec. Code,ยง 9001.) 

I, Barry Bahrami, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 18650 of the Elections 
Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an  initiative petition to be used for any purpose 
other than qualification of the proposed measure for the ballot. I certify that I will not knowingly or 
willfully allow the signatures for this initiative to be  used for any purpose other than qualification of the 
measure for the ballot." (Elec. Code,ยง 9608.) 

My mailing address for purposes of this referendum is: 

7668 El  Camino Real 
Suite 104-627 
Carlsbad, CA 92009 
Barry@VetoGunmageddon.org 

I have attached my personal registered voter address to letter. 

Sincerely, 

Barry Bahrami 
Proponent 
enclosures 

1e-oooa 


Assembly Bill No. 1511 

CHAPTER41 

An act to amend Section 27880 of the Penal Code, relating to firearms. 

[ Approved by Governor  July 01, 2016. Filed with Secretary of State  July 01, 2016.] 

LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST 

AB  1511, Santiago. Fireanns: lending. 

Existing law generally requires the loan of a firearm to be conducted through a licensed firearms dealer. A violation of this 
provision is a crime. Existing law exempts from this requirement a loan of a firearm between persons who are personally known 
to each other, if the loan is infrequent and does not exceed 30 days in duration. 

This bill would instead limit that exemption to the loan of a firearm to a spouse or registered domestic partner, or to a parent, 
child, sibling, grandparent, or grandchild, related as specified. The bill would require a handgun loaned pursuant to these 
provisions to be registered to the person loaning the handgun. By expanding the application of an existing crime, this bill would 
impose a state-mandated local program. 

The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the 
state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement. 

This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason. 

DIGEST KEY 
Vote: MAJORITY  Appropriation: NO  Fiscal Committee: YES  Local Program: YES 

BILL TEXT 

THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS: 


SECTION 1. 
Section 27880 of the Penal  Code is amended to read: 

27880. 
Section 27545 does not apply to  the  loan of a firearm if all  of the following requirements are satisfied: 

(a) The loan is to a spouse, registered domestic partner, or any of the following relations, whether by consanguinity, adoption, or 
steprelation: 

(1) Parent. 

(2) Child. 

(3) Sibling. 

(4) Grandparent. 

(5) Grandchild. 

(b) The loan is infrequent, as defined in  Section 16730. 

(c) The loan is for any lawful purpose. 

(d) The loan does not exceed 30 days in duration. 

(e) Until January 1, 2015, ifthe firearm is a handgun, the individual being loaned the fireann shall have a valid handgun safety 
certificate. Commencing January  1, 2015, for any firearm, the individual being loaned the fireann  shall have a valid :firearm 
safety certificate, except that in the case of a handgun, an unexpired handgun safety certificate may be used. 

(t) Ifthe firearm being loaned is a handgun, the handgun is registered to the person making the loan pursuant to Section 11106. 

SEC. 2. 
No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only 
costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, 
eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the 
Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 ofArticle XIII B ofthe California 
Constitution. 

