1 6  - 0  0  0  1  Arndt.# I 

Cheriel Jensen 

13737 Quito Road, Saratoga, CA 95070 

408 379-0463 (h)  408 930-0463  (c) 

cheriel j@earthlink.net 

RECEIVED 

JAN  2 5 2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

January 22, 2016 

Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
17thFloor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

RE: Amended California Clean Environment Initiative 

Dear Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator, 

Today I sent you by UPS the Amended California Clean Environment Initiative text with a letter 
requesting Amendment of one word and a comma.  The original text with changes in red is also 
part of the package.  The package is promised to arrive at your office before  10:30 AM Monday 
morning. 

I here by request that a circulating title and summary ofthe chief purpose and points ofthe amended 
proposed measure be prepared. 

Thanks so much, 

Signed, 

-

/ 

...  ' 

' .. 

Cheriel Jensen 

Cheriel Jensen 


13737 Quito Road, Saratoga, CA 95070 


cherielj@earthlink.net 


408 379-0463  (h)  408 930-0463 (c) 


January 22, 2016 

Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 
17th Floor, 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

RE:  California Clean Environment Initiative, request for amendment 

Dear Ashley, 

Thank you so much for all your help with this.  It has come to my attention that there is  a mistaken 
double negative in the California Clean Initiative on page 7, Section q: 

"No one shall not be excluded from medical care, employment, school, daycare, or removed 
from current caregivers on the basis of medical choice concerning injections."  In addition, as 
you see, there is a missing comma in that sentence shown here also in red. 

No matter how I tried to proof with the help of several people it was missed.  "Not" is a real 
mistake.  It must be refiled to read: 

"No one shall be excluded from medical care, employment, school, daycare, or removed from 
current caregivers on the basis of medical choice concerning injections." 

-a single word change, and a comma, but critical. 

Please file the Amended text.  Attached is the whole corrected text.  Also attached is  a whole copy 
of the original text with the deletions and additions as  explained above marked in red on page 7, 
section q.  It is my hope this can be reviewed and done today. 

Thanks ever so much for your help with this.  Please let me know if more is  needed to accomplish 
this Amendment. 

Yours truly 
CherielJensen 
cherielj@earthlink.net 

. 

408 379-0463 
408 930-0463 

2 Attachments 

This initiative measure, to be submitted to the voters 
of California November 2016 or 2018, amends the 
California Civil Code, Government Code, Health and 
Safety Code, and Penal Code where applicable. 
This initiative shall be known as: 
CALIFORNIA CLEAN ENVIRONMENT 
INITIATIVE. 

SECTION a., CLEAN ENVIRONMENT 
REQUIRED: 

We the people of California have inalienable right 

to clean: water, air, land, agricultural crops, seeds, 
food, forests, roadsides, the ocean, and watersheds. 

We have the right to organic food uncontaminated 
or genetically manipulated. We have the right to grow 
organic gardens uncontaminated by pesticide 
applications or drift. 

Genetically engineered life forms, or life forms fed 

genetically engineered life forms have not been 
objectively tested according to the criteria of 
SECTION e. to prove safety over time, cannot prove 
they will not genetically alter the surrounding 
environment, and thus are not allowed in California. 
Bees and other pollinators are essential to produce 
food and shall not be poisoned by chemicals applied 
to seeds, crops or poison drift. 

Products are allowed only if they, their packaging 
or their waste products do not contaminate people or 
the environment in their testing, growing, processing, 
development, presence, recycling, composting or 
disposal. All items as packaged having less than a 
two-year useful life in their current form must be 
designed to be safely, easily and obviously recyclable 
or compostable. 

Any product made to be ingested, injected, 

inserted or used next to or on human skin must be 
formed without toxic ingredients or processes. 
California residents require a safe radiation 

environment. 

No business, government or person has the right to 

poison anyone, harm anyone, or harm the 
environment with their products. California residents 
are not guinea pigs for corporations. 

Incremental toxic exposures over time add to 

significant, complex exposures with substantial health 
and environmental consequences. California residents 
choose health over uncontrolled toxic exposure. 

SECTION b., THE URGENT NEED FOR THIS 
MEASURE: 

Cancer was a relatively rare disease a century ago. 

1 6  - 0  0  0  1  Arndt# 

Now more than one in three people is projected to die 
from cancer.  Autism, almost unheard of in 1975, now 
alarmingly impacts more than one in 50 children, the 
rate accelerating. Cancer, autism, some Parkinson's, 
are known to be caused by pesticide, other toxic 
exposures, or radiation. Monstrous fires have burned 
forests desiccated by herbicide, seriously damaging 
California watersheds. Herbicide-soaked food is now 
common.  The U.S. Agriculture Department estimated 
last year that 42% ofU.S honeybee colonies died in 
the  12-month period ended in April 2015.  Loss of 
bees and other pollinators killed by pesticides, poses a 
significant threat to our food supply. Methane, a 
serious contributor to climate change, is leaked by 
current fracking extraction and in-ground storage 
techniques seriously threatening a livable climate. 

For all these reasons and many more, we must now 

have control over pollution now. 

SECTION c.  CALIFORNIA CLEAN 
ENVIRONMENT AUTHORITY (CCEA). 
The regulation of the subject matter of this 

measure will be overseen by the California Clean 
Environment Authority governed by an elected, three­
person California Clean Environment Board, elected 
by the voters of California beginning in the Primary 
election of 2018 and each four years thereafter. 

Funding to influence this election can come only 
from individual California electors.  Donations per 
election are limited to $1,000 per elector.  No 
corporate funds, or out-of-state funds are allowed to 
influence any California Clean Environment 
Authority Board election.  Those having a history of 
current or past connections with any industry making 
products regulated by this initiative are not eligible to 
serve on the Board or staff of the CCEA, nor can they 
be hired by such industries within 6 years of their 
CCEA employment. 

Until the election of the CCEA Board in 2018, the 
Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment 
( established by Proposition 65), will begin the 
scientific, regulatory and investigative work of the 
California California Clean Environment Authority. 
The Governor shall have no authority to override 
the California Clean Environment Authority Board. 

Due to the subject matter of this initiative, 

whistleblowers, in both government and private 
business are one key to operation of this measure. It is 
a felony violation of this measure to fire,  or otherwise 
punish or contribute to punishment of a 
whistle blower. 

1 


Whenever a project threatens to increase air, water, 

or land pollution, or impact adversely the radiation 
environment, these changes shall be addressed by an 
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) or Environmental 
Impact Statement (EIS). The California Clean 
Environment Authority Board shall review EIRs or 
EISs and require project alteration to minimize or 
stop adverse impacts. The CCEA is responsible to 
evaluate chemicals and processes, adjust the list of 
prohibited chemicals to further promote a clean 
environment and determine safe non-ionizing 
radiation parameters to protect health and the 
environment. 

SECTION d., TOXIC TRESPASS: 

The presence, manufacturing or growing of toxic 

or harmful substances, genetically altered flora or 
fauna, nanoparticles, injurious radiation frequencies, 
patterns or levels, these further described within this 
measure, constitutes toxic trespass on individuals and 
groups, the people's environment, public or private 
property, land, the common air, waters of California, 
or California's part of the Pacific Ocean whether such 
trespass arises from actions or failure to act when 
there is a responsibility to act, by a:  patent holder, 
user, grower, applier, fracker, owner, manufacturer, 
contractor, transporter, public official, government 
organization, public utility, health care professional, 
neighbor, neighborhood organization, or any other 
person or group, unless such action is to limit wider 
exposure.  Administrators, Board Members, and 
Supervisors of an organization violating this measure 
are subject to criminal charges and/or torts. 

SECTION e., PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE. 
We Californians have the right in our person and 

environment to be free from human-caused exposures 
to: heavy metals; other toxic chemicals; damaging 
ionizing and non-ionizing radiation; genetically 
engineered flora or fauna, nanoparticles, and 
manufactured substances that cannot be recycled or 
composted. Before introduction, independent research 
must show these do NOT invade living cell wall 
structure, persist in the environment or damage, or 
persist in the human body ofthose who do not choose 
such specific entry. Nothing may be introduced into 
people, commerce or the environment if it causes, or 
increases the probability of one or more of the 
following in people, mammals, birds, bees, other 
beneficial insects, or amphibians: death, cancer*, 
SIDS, sickness, infection, paralysis, structural or 

functional birth defects*, pregnancy complications, 
developmental complications*, cellular structural 
damage; functional nerve damage, diminished 
intelligence*, depression, aggression, demyelination, 
brain tumors of any type*, encephalitis; the disorders: 
autism*, autism spectrum*, attention deficit* or 
attention deficit hyperactivity*; Guillain-Barre 
syndrome, seizures; fluorosis*, brittle bones*; joint 
damage*; thyroid, testosterone, estrogen, cortisone, or 
other harmful hormone impacts*, pineal gland 
calcification*, early or delayed puberty*, extra heavy 
or lengthy menstrual bleeding, reproductive system 
damage*; Parkinson's*, Alzheimer's*; eye damage 
demonstrated by reduced vision*, dry eyes, red eyes, 
watery eyes, cataracts*; ear inflammation, hearing 
damage; intestinal bacteria die-off, gut cell genetic 
alteration*; chemical burns, rash*, eczema*, swelling, 
spontaneous nose bleeding, idiopathic 
thrombocytopenia purpura; breathing difficulty, 
asthma*, voice volume or frequency losses, coughing, 
rhinitis, allergy*, anaphylaxis, immune system 
deregulation*, lupus*, fibromyalgia*, chemical 
sensitivity*; pancreas, kidney, spleen or liver 
damage*, insulin resistance*, diabetes*; interference 
with sleep, inability to concentrate; pain, headache, 
racing heart, irregular heart beat; body retention of the 
toxic substance or its' breakdown products*; 
negatively impact beneficial organisms of the 
interactive environment*; nor is it a patented life 
form, micro-size, nor may it interfere with mineral 
binding in the digestive system of people* or fauna, 
mineral loss in flora, mineral binding in soil* ,result in 
loss of productivity of the soil*; vegetation 
desiccation, increase fire risk; beneficial insect 
reduction*, nor may it contribute to native pollinator 
loss or honey bee colony collapse*, or otherwise 
impact native frog*, dragonfly*, mosquito eater*, 
fish*, avian*  or amphibian populations*. 

(*Indicates two-year testing is standard for 

determining safety.) 

Three generation test animal testing may be 
required where damages may be handed down 
through generations. 

Testing must be hands off for those proposing 

introduction of specific chemicals, radiation, micro 
particles.  Research shall be done by CCEA 
researchers, by universities and/or by independent 
laboratories.  Funding for the testing shall be provided 
by the proponent. 

Substances currently in trade and circulation 

exhibiting any of the above effects in independent 

2 


testing shall be removed from trade as follows on 
whichever-is-shorter timetable: where the use 
provides urgent life support and no alternatives exist, 
as soon as there is an adequate safer alternative or 
after two years whichever is shorter, this time frame 
can be extended upon California Clean Environment 
Authority Board majority targeted decision; where 
use is convenient but not necessary, within 6 months 
of adoption of this initiative, or as soon as a safer 
alternative exists; where uses are not necessary and 
do not enhance convenience and alternatives are in 
use now, these introductions are prohibited at once 
upon adoption of this measure. Exception: in closed 
systems where no person and no part of the 
environment is or will be exposed in the product 
lifetime or by product conversion or disposal. 

SECTION f., TOXIC TRESPASS IS 
PROHIBITED WHETHER BY MEANS OF: 
direct or indirect environmental release by aircraft, 
vehicle, truck fogger, pipeline, rail car, balloon, 
watercraft, drift; release into homes or other 
buildings, adding chemically contaminated water to 
any water body, injecting into land or aquifers, 
spreading on land; planting or otherwise spreading 
pesticide contaminated or genetically engineered 
seeds; farming or allowing escape of live genetically 
engineered fish eggs; incorporation in a product 
designed to go down the storm or sanitary drain; 
incorporation into a product designed to eventually be 
discarded, designed for trade, production, or 
manufacturing; or radiation emitter emitting 
damaging frequencies, patterns or damaging levels. 

SECTION g., CLEAN WATER: 

Water districts, agencies and companies shall 

provide water in as clean condition as possible. 
As soon as possible, or within 3 years of the 

passage of this measure water delivered to California 
customers, where treated, shall be treated with oxygen 
rather than chlorine. 

Upon passage ofthis measure, no 

hydrofluorosilicic acid or other forms of fluoride or 
other additives shall be added to delivered tap water. 
Neither inland waters nor the ocean shall be used 

for toxic waste, trash, or heat disposal. 
SECTION h., TOXIC TRESPASS IS 
PROHIBITED IN CALIFORNIA whether for: 
someone's own good, group or corporation's profit, 
non-isolation testing, convenience, or accident. 
SECTION i., TRESPASS AND TRESPASS 

TORTS, PENALTIES: 

Toxic chemical contamination, nanoparticle 

contamination, altered genetics, toxic injections, 
damaging non-ionizing radiation frequencies, 
intensities or cycling above set limits, and ionizing 
radiation exposure are "trespass "misdemeanors" or 
"trespass felonies" and "trespass torts" ofhuman or 
environmental exposure.  Trespass misdemeanors, 
felonies and trespass torts address an increment of 
real increased hazard.  Effects may not become name­
recognized for several years. Because cancer, other 
exposure injuries, reduction ofthe capacity of soils to 
produce food, loss of pollinators and other effects can 
take many years to recognize, violation of this 
initiative's provisions and crimes under Penal Code 
Sections 374.8, and 375, trespass misdemeanors, 
felonies and torts are not required to prove injury, but 
to both penalize and compensate for invasion of 
bodily privacy or environmental trespass through 
exposure possibly shortening life, increasing physical 
and mental distress, or limiting the ability of the 
environment to support life. 

Trespass misdemeanor penalties are 2 days in 

prison and up to $500 fine per day per trespass victim. 
Trespass felony penalties are 3 days to  15 years in 
prison and unlimited fines in accord with losses, the 
higher amounts to compensate neighborhoods, 
communities and even the state population for 
hazardous exposures. Half of trespass fines are 
designated for those trespassed, 3/10 for support of 
the CCEA, and 1/10 to local law enforcement and the 
District Attorneys who investigate, recognize and 
prosecute trespass felonies for their work.  One tenth 
of fines shall be reserved for protection and 
compensation to whistleblowers. 

Juries shall determine awards based on violation of 

the right to a clean environment, and future potential 
damages.  Such award may compensate for a projected 
shortened life span; chronic pain; immune system 
damage leading to cancer; the increased possibility of 
acquiring Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, or diabetes; 
potential loss of productivity of land; loss of quality 
of or loss of use of an aquifer; potential loss of ability 
to grow organic food;  accelerated climate change, or 
similar potential damages from effects of exposure as 
described in SECTION e. 

SECTION j., "TRESPASS PERSONAL INJURY" 
is for injury and damage following contamination or 
exposure. Each injured person shall have cause and 
the right to join together with others injured, or bring 

3 


a class action suit. 
SECTION k., ENVIRONMENTAL TRESPASS 
PROPERTY DAMAGE PROHIBITED: 

"Trespass property damages" are separate felonies 

and torts.  Contamination damage of soil, air, water, 
vegetation, damaging non-ionizing radiation above 
set limits, or ionizing radiation contamination is 
environmental trespass, prohibited contamination of 
the environment. 

Each user, patent holder, manufacturer, 

contributing manufacturer,. distributor, retail seller, 
user, exporter, importer or transporter, together or 
separately, shall be responsible in criminal law and 
tort for the fact of contamination caused by their 
product or actions, and also responsible for the 
consequent injury. 

SECTION 1., RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENTS 
ARE NOT USED IN CALIFORNIA. 

We reject EPA "risk vs. benefit" in the evaluation 

of the subject matter of this measure because those 
subject to exposures are generally: (1) not informed 
of the risk or given the opportunity to refuse, (2) those 
benefiting from risky products or actions are rarely 
the same people as those subject to risk, (3) long term 
environmental integrity and long term health are 
rarely taken into account, ( 4) those at risk may not be 
born, not yet present, too young to consent, or 
especially vulnerable, ( 5) risk evaluations are based 
on the idea of how low to set allowable exposure 
ignoring the research showing small exposures can, in 
many cases, be more harmful than larger exposures 
by impacting hormone processes, (6) risk evaluation 
never accounts for the number of and varied 
exposures to which people are subjected. 

The CCEA shall not approve any toxic potential 

based on "risk assessment" but shall act based on 
their responsibility for uncontaminated, undamaged 
people and environment taking into account long 
term, vulnerability, consent, and cumulative effects. 

SECTION m., STANDING, CLASS ACTION. 
Californians who have been contaminated, or 
exposed to harmful substances or processes have 
standing in court for the fact of toxic trespass. The 
state court system has jurisdiction to adjudicate toxic 
trespass.  Toxic trespass is subject to class action. 

There is no Statute of Limitations on the crimes 

or torts of this measure. 

SECTION n., PROHIBITED AND REQUIRED 

PROCESSES: 

1)  Fracking gas extraction techniques which leak 

methane on or off shore, and insecure storage of 
methane containing gases are hereby prohibited. 
Fossil fuels  storage is subject to inspection at any 
time without announcement, and must be managed 
securely. 

2)  Soils must be managed to sequester carbon. 
3)  Genetically engineered life forms:  flora, 
fauna, animals fed genetically engineered food, 
and genetically engineered vaccine ingredients, 
cannot be present, planted, grown, developed, sold, 
tested, gifted, injected or transported through 
California as they present a serious threat to our 
genetic heritage, to health, and have not been tested 
according to SECTION e., criteria. 

Life forms genetically engineered include those 

where: genes, DNA, RNA, or chromosomes from one 
species have been inserted into another species, where 
Bt has been genetically made integral, where genetic 
components are switched on or off, where the 
CRISPR genome editing technique was used, or 
which include the episite gene (anti-sperm gene), 
patented life forms, terminator seeds, or flora or fauna 
from terminator seeds, 

4)  New nuclear materials, which have no safe 

storage designated, shall not be brought into or 
through California.  Materials emitting ionizing 
radiation may not be retained, used or stored 
anywhere in California near or subject to tsunami, 
predicted sea rise, flooding, earthquake, landslide, in 
watersheds or agricultural land, or near places people 
live or work, and must be safely encapsulated to last 
for at least 150 years. A plan to isolate materials 
emitting ionizing radiation is required no later than 
2018 and isolation completed by 2021. 

5) "Smart meters" are prohibited in California 

because they are neither smart nor meters but 
intermittent samplers, not accurate, not accountable, 
emit and receive unnecessary radiation, have not been 
tested for safety, and have a history of explosion and 
fire.  Smart meters shall be removed within a three­
year time frame beginning with those households with 
children below the age of 10, then multifamily 
households, then the remainder of power connections. 
Those who were charged for opting out shall be fully 
and immediately reimbursed all opt out fees paid, 
with 3% interest. No radiation emitters or receivers 
shall be connected to power poles or towers near 
residential areas as the electro magnetic frequencies 
and intensities from the transmission lines alone 

4 


already burden nearby children. No new radiation 
emitters or receivers or additions to these shall be 
located in residential zoning districts, on or near 
school facilities, daycare facilities or near children's 
parks or playfields, 

6)  Emitters and receivers of radio frequencies 

in the one millimeter to one meter shall be 
investigated for health effects and interference with 
AM and FM radio. Within 3 years, limits on 
frequencies, power, cycling and distances to sensitive 
receptors, shall be scientifically established by the 
CCEA. Set limits shall protect newborns, children and 
sensitive individuals from sleep disturbance, cancer, 
ability to concentrate, autism, and hyperactivity. 
These limits shall go into effect when established and 
shall be incorporated into the zoning codes 
throughout the state. Emission levels, patterns and 
frequencies and emitter locations shall be adjusted 
accordingly. Land communication lines shall be 
maintained and retained. 

7)  Certified organic growers can sell their raw 

organic almonds without coating, heat or irradiation, 

SECTION o.  PROHIBITED TOXIC 
CHEMICALS AND SUBSTANCES INCLUDE: 
Chemicals listed in the ASTR 2013 Substance 
Priority List 
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/SPL/index.html  with the 

exception of numbers 69, 75, 78, 87, 104, 118, 145, 

151, 157, 171, 179, 182, 186, 197,213,219,221,245 

on the list, 

Specific agricultural poisons tested positive for 

residues in food, groundwater and drinking water as 

reported in the US.D.A.  Pesticide Data Program, 

Annual Summary, Calendar Year 2013, published 

December 2014, 

fumigants:  methyl iodide, methyl bromide, Telone, 

1,3-dichloropropene, metam sodium, 

Organochlorine pesticides, 

Organophosphate pesticides, 

Pyrethroids, pyrethroid esters and pyrethroid 

ester-like pesticide, 

the carbamate pesticides including:  Carbary!, 

carbofuran, and methomyl, 

herbicides: Agent orange, Aminopyralid, amitrole 

( aminotriazole ), atrazine, aminomethylphosphonic 

acid (AMP A), Alachlor, diquat, chlorophenoxy­
herbicides, cyanazine, Enlist Duo, MCP A, 2,4-D (2,4­
dichlorophenoxy acetic acid), 2,4,5-T, dicamba, 

glyphosate herbicides (Roundup, Accord, Rodeo), 

glyphosine. glufosinate ammonium, Imazapyr, 


indoleacetic acid, Isoproturon systemic herbicide, 

Lasso, mecoprop, hexa, hepta or octa-dibenzo-p­
dioxins, Paraquat, picloram, Tordon 22K, Silvex, 

Simazine, TCDD phenoxy herbicide 2,3,7,8­
tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, TOK E25, TOK RM, 

Touchdown, triazine group, trietazine, Trifluralin, 

as systemic insecticides: 

integral Bacillus thuringiensis, integral Bacillus 

thuringiensis israelensis ((Cry toxins) (all but 

indistinguishable from Bacillus anthracis (anthrax) 

and with structural similarities with ricin), 

neonicotinoid pesticide: all pesticides based on 

neonicotinoid chemistry including but not limited to 

acetamiprid, clothianidin, Dinotefuran 20SG, 

imidacloprid, nitenpyram, nithiazine, sulfoxaflor, 

thiacloprid, Thiamethoxam, Venom Insecticide, 

rat poisons: brodifacoum, bromadiolone, 

chlorophacinone, difethialone and diphacinone, 

fungicide: methylene chloride, Captan, tebuconazole, 

Prochloraz, 

also:  asbestos, 2-Butoxyethanol (in Corexit 9527 A, 

Corexit 9500), pentachlorophenol (PCP), 

polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), potassium 

bromate, 4-nonylphenol, 

"flame retardants": organohalogens, Firemaster 

550, polybrominated dipheyl ethers, OctaPBDEs, 

PentaBDE, Deca-BDE, TBBPA, TCEP, tris (1,3­
dichloroisopropyl) phosphate (TDCPP). 

herbicides with fluoride: Fluridone, Fludioxonil, 

Fluroxpyr, Trifluralin, 

pesticide with fluoride including: benzovindiflupyr, 

certain chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants (CFC 11, 

12, and HCFA-22 and any chlorofluorocarbons with 

ozone depleting potential of more than 0.1  due to 

damage to the ozone layer), CFC refrigerants with an 

atmospheric life of over 10 years, 

fluoride compounds: 2-(N-Ethyl-perfluorooctane 

sulfonamido) acetic acid, 2-(N-Methyl­
perfluorooctane sulfonamido) ethanol (N-MeFOSE), 

PFPEs, PFCAa, Perfluorobutane sulfonic acid 

(PFBS), Fluorotelomer-based chemicals, 4:2 diPAP, 

4:2 FTOH, 6:2 FTOHs, DiPAPs, 6:2 diPAP, 6:2/8:2 
diPAPs, 8:2 FTOH, 8:2 diPAP, 8:2 monoPAP, 8.2 
FTS, 10:2 diPAP,  10.3 FTOH, PFASs, PFBA, PFOS, 
PFBS, PFPeA, PFHxS, PFHpS, PFHxA, PFTDA, 
PFTrDA, PFHxDA, PFOcDA, PF AS, PFPeS, 
PFUnA, PF AS, PFCA, PSF A, PFNA, PFNS, PFis, 
PFDA, PFBA, PFSA, PFDS, FTCA, FTUCA, 
fluorinated iodine alkanes (FIAs), fluorinated diiodine 
alkanes (FDIAs), polyfluoroalkyl phosphates (PAPs), 
Perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDoA), 

5 








Perfluorodecanoic acid, Perfluoroheptanoic acid, 
Perfluorohexane sulfonic acid , Perfluorononanoic 
acid, Perfluorooctane sulfonamide, Perfluorooctane 
sulfonic acid, (PFOS) Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), 
Perfluoroundecanoic acid, 6:2 flurotelomar 
sultonamide alkylbetaine, polyfluorinated ether 
sulfonate, Cl-PF As, Cl-PFHxS, ketone-PFOS, ether­
PFHxS, fluorosilicic acid, hydrofluorosilicic acid, 
hexafluorosilicic acid, sodium silicofluoride, silcone 
tetrafluoride, hydrogen fluoride, PFCs perfluorinated 
compounds as a class, chemicals that break down to 
PFOAs, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), Teflon™, 
PFOA or perfluorooctanoic acid, C8, C7, C6, CS, C4, 
C3, C2, PFOS (Perfluorooctane sulfonate), 
in "cleaning" detergents, soaps, and deodorizing 
products: 
2, 5-dichlorophenol (2, 5-DCP), metabolite of 
1,4-dichlorobenzene (paradichlorobenzene ), benzene, 
styrene, phenol,  petroleum solvents, butyl cellosolve, 
synthetic musks. 
Other prohibited substances: 
formaldehyde ( also prohibited in embalming fluid), 
tricolsan, tricholorethylene, trichloroethane, 
Triethanolamine.._Benzophenone 4 (BP4), 
DMDM Hydantoin (formaldehyde releasing 
preservative), Ceteareth-20.._ethanolamine-compounds 
(1,4-dioxane is generated through a process called 
ethoxylation),_triethanolamine TEA, diethanolamine, 
DEA,_cocamide DEA, cocamide MEA, DEA-cetyl 
phosphate, DEA oleth-3 phosphate,Jauramide DEA, 
linoleamide MEA, myristamide DEA, oleamide DEA, 
stearamide MEA, TEA-lauryl sulfate,_sodium laureth 
sulfate,_piperonyl butoxide, propyl baraben, triphenyl 
phosphate in nail polish, hair straighteners containing 
formaldehyde, and makeup containing methylene 
glycol and/or Quatemium-15, 
paper bleaching: where furans or dioxides found in 
end products. 
Prohibited for uses in contact with people, skin 
care, cosmetics, or in food: 
mineral oil in food, cosmetics: petrolatum, antimony 
in cosmetics and as loose dust: propylene oxide 
(PPO) in food or plastics in contact with food, 
Body penetrating prohibited phthalates include: 
Benzylbutyl phthalate (BzBP), Dipropylheptyl 
phthalate (DPHP) (plasticizer), Di-n-octyl phthalate 
(DnOP), di-2-ethylhexylphlatate (DEHP), diethyl 
phthalate, di-2-ethyl phthalate (DEP), dibutyl 
phthalates (DBP), phthalates as part of PVC, 
"fragrance" linked phthalates, di-isobutylphthalate 
(DIBP), di-isononyl phthalate (DINP), di-isodecyl 

phthalate (DIDP), octylphenol, ortho-phthalates, 

nonylphenol ethoxylates (NPEs), 

Petroleum. 

Also prohibited: 

PCB, PCB-11 volatile form, 

Heavy metals:  Lead except in lead-containing 

batteries where systems for capture are in place, 

lead acetate, mercury in all forms, cadmium except in 

cadmium containing batteries where systems for 

capture are in place, arsenic, and compounds 

containing arsenic, nano size aluminum, aluminum in 

powder form (unless fully contained), Titanium 

dioxide in particle sizes that can invade individual 

human cells, artificial fragrances, polybrominated 

dibenzo:furans, polybrominated dibenzodioxins, 

decabromodiphenyl ether, octabromodiphenyl ether, 

pentabromodiphenyl ether, benzylparaben, Bisphenol 

A (BP A), Bisphenol B (BPS), butyiparaben, 

ethylparaben, FD&C red #3  & 40), carmine, yellow 

dye #5  & 6, FD&C Blue No 2, FD&C Green No.3, 

hexachlorobenzene, isobutylparaben, 

methylisothiazolinone, methylparaben, oxybenzone, 

paraben, perchlorate, plastic microbeads, 

Polyethersulfone (PES), Polystyrene (PS) 

propylparaben, triclosan, triphenyl phosphate (TPHP), 

toluene, xylene. 


SECTION p., PROIDBITED EXPERIMENTAL, 

TOXIC OR OTHERWISE DANGEROUS 

COMPONENTS IN MEDICAL INJECTIONS 

AND DEVICES, include: mercury in any form, lead, 

aluminum in any form, arsenic, cadmium, radioactive 

substances, benzene, fluoride, recombinant cells, 

cancer cells, ever-living cells, fetal cells which do not 

match the blood type ofthe recipient, formaldehyde, 

glutaraldehyde, flu protein that cross-reacts to the 

brain's orexin receptor ( causing narcolepsy), 

Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium, porcine 

circovirus types 1 and 2, monosodium glutamate 

(MSG), other glutamates, aspartame, WI-38 human 

diploid lung fibroblasts, antibiotic if individual is 

allergic to antibiotics, polysorbate 80, ethylene glycol, 

insect cells, hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide, 

animal kidney cells, viral protein except for the 

specific, virus being vaccinated, untested vaccines, 

and vaccines tested the outcome of which have 

compared unfavorably to fully unvaccinated 

populations.  Each vaccine dose shall be individually 

packaged to prevent potential contamination. 


MEDICAL INJECTION TESTING REQUIRED: 

Vaccines must show safety on at least 2,000 

6 


volunteers compared to an equal sized, fully 
unvaccinated control group before incorporation into 
any vaccine given in California. Vaccine testing shall 
be overseen by the California Office of 
Environmental Health Hazard Assessment and 
transferred to the CCEA when it is in place. 

SECTION q., MEDICAL INJECTION 
FREEDOM:  Parents, guardians and adults have 
control without penalty over the spacing, numbers 
and types of medical injections administered to them 
and their children. No one shall be excluded from 
medical care, employment, school, daycare, or 
removed from current caregivers on the basis of 
medical choice concerning injections.  People may be 
temporarily excused from their workplace, school or 
daycare if a communicable disease is present for 
which they are unvaccinated. 

Vaccination shall be given only in a medical 

setting. A parent or guardian must be present, fully 
informed of the contents ofthe vaccine, and consent 
in writing when vaccinating a child. 

No child who has experienced an adverse reaction 

to a vaccine shall be given additional vaccines. 

SECTION r., ADULTERATED: FOODS, FIBER, 
FLORA, FAUNA, AIR, LAND AND WATER 
ARE PROIDBITED IN CALIFORNIA. 
ADULLTERATED FOODS INCLUDE: 

Any food grown on land where municipal sewage 
sludge, fracking waste and/or other contamination has 
been applied, any food, fiber, paper, timber, 
vegetation grown or processed in the presence of 
prohibited agricultural poisons, listed in SECTION o, 
animals or animal products intended for the food 
chain fed or given ractopamin, zilpaterol, steroids, 
cocciodiostats, growth hormones, arsenicals, beta 
agonist animal drugs or any substance similar to these 
intended to artificially promote growth, animals 
intended for the food chain given antibiotics except 
when medically prescribed to treat a specific 
biological infection, cancer causing substances in 
food or supplements: acesulfame-potassium, artificial 
colorings, aspartyl-phenylalanine-1-methyl-ester, 
butylated hydroyanisole, butylated hydroxytoluene, 
carmel color with ammonia, carrageenan, diacetyl, 
potassium bromate, propyl 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoate, 
saccharin, sodium benzoate, or tert­
butylhydroquinone, 

applies to flora, fauna, prepared food, cosmetics, 
soaps, cleaning products, personal care products and 
fabrics may be used only where prohibited ingredients 
and processes in this measure have not been used in 
their growth or preparation, nor have they been 
irradiated nor do they contain any trans-fats, 
hydrogenated fats, artificial flavors, monosodium 
glutamate, sulfites, butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), 
butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), sucralose, 
aspartame, Acesulfame-potassium, carrageenan,  l,2­
benzisothiazolin-3-one-1,1-dioxide, Saccharin, 
carboxymethylcellulose, gluten as an additive, wheat 
derived modified food starch, wheat derived mono­
and Di-glycerides, Olestra, Salatrim, soy oil, or 
hexane extracted oils. 

SECTION t, FULL DISCLOSURE of each and 
every ingredient for any agricultural poison and any 
other toxic product is required. Any chemicals to be 
used on foods, watersheds, agricultural lands, 
aquifers, forests, which could make it's way on, in, or 
near the human body, human domicile, school, food 
crops, water bodies, aquifers, or watersheds 
containing restricted disclosure of content or trade 
secrets is prohibited. 

No court may order proceedings, findings or 
rulings on the matters ofthis initiative to remain 
secret. 

SECTION u., Official misconduct. -­
1) It is unlawful for a public servant, with corrupt 
intent to obtain a benefit for any person or to cause 
harm to another, to: 
(a) Falsify, or cause another person to falsify, any 
official record or official document; 
(b) Conceal, cover up, destroy, mutilate, or alter any 
official record or official document or cause another 
person to perform such an act; or 
(c) Obstruct, delay, or prevent the communication of 
information relating to the commission of a felony 
that directly involves or affects the public agency or 
public entity served by the public servant. 
SECTIONv., 

Chemical references, as herein spelled, apply to 
the chemical or product in all it's various spellings. 

If any word, phrase, sentence, or paragraph of this 
measure is found by a court of competent jurisdiction 
to be invalid, all other parts ofthis measure shall 
remain in full force, intent and effect. 

Where in conflict with other California law, this 

SECTION s., THE TERM "NATURAL" as it 

initiative takes legal precedence. 

7 


