July 14, 2016 

VIA EXPRESS  MAIL 

The  Honorable Kamala  D.  Harris 
Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 17th Floor, P.O.  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

1  6  - 0  0  0  6 

RECEIVED 

JUL  1 5 2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

AITORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Request for Title and Summary for Proposed Referendum (Senate Bill  No.  1235) 

Dear Ms.  Harris: 

Pursuant to Article 11,  Section 9, of the California Constitution, I hereby submit the attached proposed 
referendum (veto referendum) and request a circulating title and summary for petitions to collect 
signatures from California voters.  I have attached the complete text ofthe bill, which is Assembly Bill 
No.1135. 

I,  Barry Bahrami, declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United States, 18 years of 
age or older, and a resident of (insert county), California." (Elec. Code,§ 9001.) 

I,  Barry Bahrami, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 18650 of the Elections 
Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an  initiative petition to be used for any purpose 
other than qualification of the proposed measure for the ballot. I certify that I will not knowingly or 
willfully allow the signatures for this initiative to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the 
measure for the ballot." (Elec. Code, § 9608.) 

My mailing address for purposes of this referendum is: 

7668 El  Camino Real 
Suite 104-627 
Carlsbad, CA 92009 
Barry@VetoGunmageddon.org 

I have attached my personal registered voter address to letter. 

Sincerely, 

~~b 

\.

Barry Bahrami 
Proponent 
enclosures 

Senate Bill No. 1235 

CHAPTER 55 


An act to amend Sections 16150, 17315, 30000, 30306, and 30352 of, to add Sections 11106.5 and 16151 to, to add Article 4 (commencing with 
Section 30355) and Article 5 (commencing with Section 30360) to Chapter 1 ofDivision 10 of Title 4 ofPart 6 of, to repeal Sections 16650, 
16662, and 30312 of, to repeal and  add Section 30370 of. and to repeal and add Article 3 (commencing with Section 30345) of Chapter 1 of 
Division 10 of Title 4 of Part 6 of, the Penal Code, relating to ammunition, and making an appropriation therefor. 

[ Approved by Governor  July 01, 2016. Filed with Secretary of State  July 01, 2016.] 

LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST 

SB 1235, De Le6n. Ammunition. 

(1) The proposed Safety for All Act of 2016, to be submitted to the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide general election, if 
enacted would, commencing January 1, 2019, allow any person who is 18 years of age or older to apply to the Department of 
Justice for an ammunition purchase authorization. The act would allow the sale of ammunition only to persons holding an 
ammunition purchase authorization or to persons who were approved by the department to receive a  firearm  from the ammunition 
vendor if the ammunition is delivered to the person in the same transaction as the firearm. The act would allow the department to 
charge a fee not to exceed $50 per person for the issuance of an ammunition purchase authorization or the issuance of a renewal 
authorization. The act would create the Ammunition Safety and Enforcement Special Fund to receive these fees and would 
continuously appropriate the funds for the purposes of implementing, operating, and enforcing the ammunition authorization 
program. The act would authorize its provisions to be amended by a statute that is passed by a vote of 55 percent of the Members 
of each house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor so long as the amendments are consistent with and further the intent 
of the act. 

This bill would, if the Safety for All Act of2016 is enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide general election, 
amend the act to instead allow ammunition to be sold only to a person whose information matches an  entry in the Automated 
Firearms System and who  is eligible to possess ammunition, to a person who has a current certificate of eligibility issued by the 
department, or to a person who purchases or transfers the ammunition in a single ammunition transaction, as specified. Ifthe act 
is enacted by the voters, the bill would amend the act to charge ammunition purchasers and transferees a per transaction fee not to 
exceed $1, as provided, and would deposit the funds into the Almnunition Safety and Enforcement Special Fund created by the 
act, which fund would be continuously appropriated by the act,  thereby making an  appropriation. If the act is enacted by the 
voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide general election, the other provisions of this bill would not become operative. Because 
this bill would amend the act, it would require a vote of 55 percent of the Members of each house of the Legislature. 

The bill would make Legislative findings and declarations that these amendments further the intent ofthe act. 

(2) Existing law requires the Attorney General to maintain records, including, among other things,  fingerprints,  licenses to carry 
concealed firearms, and infmmation from firearms dealers pertaining to fireanns, for purposes of assisting in the investigation of 
crimes and specified civil actions. In regard to certain of those records, existing law authorizes specified peace officers to 
disseminate the name of the subject ofthe record, the number of firearms listed in the record, the description of any fircatm, and 
other infomiation reported to the Department of Justice, as specified, if the subject of the record has been arraigned. is being 
prosecuted, or is serving a sentence for domestic violence or is the subject of specified protective orders. Existing law requires 
the law enforcement officer to provide a victim of domestic violence to whom information is disseminated with a '·Victims of 
Domestic Violence" card, and authorizes the victim or other person to whom the information is disseminated to disclose that 
infomrntion as  he or she deems necessai·y to protect himself: hersel±~ or another person from bodily hann by the person who is the 
subject of the record. 

This bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, require the Attorney General to also maintain information about ammunition transactions and  ammunition 
vendor licenses for those purposes. The bill would similarly authorize specified agencies, officials, and officers to disseminate the 
name of a person and the fact of any anmmnition purchases by that person, as specified, if the subject of the record has been 
atTaigned,  is being prosecuted, or is serving a sentence for domestic violence or is the subject of specified protective orders. The 
bill ,vould require the law enforcement officer to provide a victim of domestic violence to whom infommtion regarding an 
ainmunition purchase is disseminated with a "Victims of Domestic Violence" card. 

By imposing new duties on local law enforcement officers, this bill would impose a state-mandated local progratn. 

(3) Existing law, subject to exceptions, requires that the delivery or transfer of ovmership of handgun ainmunition occur only in  a 
face-to-face transaction and makes a violation of this requirement a crime. 

This bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, extend those provisions, subject to exceptions, to any ammunition and would reorganize those provisions. 

(4) Existing law provides that the tenn "vendor" for purposes of ammunition sales is a "handgun ammunition vendor" as defined 
for those and other purposes. 

This bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, provide that the tenn "vendor" for purposes of ammunition sales means "ammunition vendor" and, commencing 
January L 2018, means a licensed ammunition vendor. The bill would provide that commencing on January 1,  2018, only a 
licensed ainmunition vendor may sell ammunition. The bill would revise the definition of "ammunition" for those purposes. 

(5) Existing law establishes the Prohibited Anned Persons File, the purpose of which  is to cross-reference persons prohibited 
from  possessing fireanns with records offiream1 transactions to determine if these persons have acquired or attempted to acquire 
firearms. Under existing law, a person who is prohibited from owning or possessing a fireann is prohibited :from owning, 
possessing, or having under his or her custody or control any atnmunition or reloaded ammunition. 

This bill would, commencing July  1,  2019, if the proposed Safety for All  Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the 
November 8, 2016, statewide general election, use the Prohibited Aimed Persons File to cross-reference persons who attempt to 
acquire ammunition, a~  specified, to detennine if those persons are prohibited from possessing ammunition. 

(6) Existing law makes it a crime for a person, corporation, or firm to provide atnmunition, as specified. to an individual that the 
person, corporation, or fim1 knows or should know is prohibited from possessing or owning ammunition. 

This bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, apply that prohibition to other business enterprises. The bill would make it a crime for a person, corporation, 
firm,' or other business enterprise to provide. as specified, anmmnition to an individual that the person, corporation, firm,  or other 
business entity knows or has cause to believe is not the actual purchaser or transferee of the ammunition or knows or has cause to 
believe that the ammunition is to be sold or transferred to a person prohibited from  possessing or ov1-ning ammunition. 

(7) Existing law prohibits atl ammunition vendor from allowing a person the vendor knows or should know is a person who is 
prohibited from possessing firearms, for specified reasons, from handling, selling, or delivering handgun ainmunition in the 
course at1d scope of his or her employment. Existing law prohibits an ammunition vendor :from selling or othenvise trat1sferring 

ownership of, offering for sale or otherwise offering to transfer ownership of.  or displaying for sale or displaying for transfer of 
ownership of, any handgun ammunition in a manner that allows that ammunition to be accessible to a purcha.,er or transferee 
without the assistance of the vendor or an employee ofthe vendor. 

This bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, extend those prohibitions to any ammunition. The bill would require that when neither party to the ammunition 
transaction is an  ammunition dealer, the transaction be conducted by an ammunition dealer. The bill would, subject to exceptions, 
require a resident bringing an1mt111ition into the state to have the ammunition delivered to an ammunition dealer for delivery to 
the person, as specified. The bill would provide that a violation of these provisions is a crime. 

(8) Existing law, subject to exceptions, requires a handgun ammunition vendor to record specified infom1ation at the time of 
delivery of handgun ammunition to a purchaser, as specified. 

This bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of 2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, extend those provisions to transactions of any ammunition and would, commencing on July 1, 2019, require the 
ammunition vendor to submit that info1mation to the Department of Justice, as specified. The bill would require the department 
to retain the information for 2 years in a database to be knO\vn  a., the Ammunition Purchase Records File and would prescribe the 
authority of the department and other entities to use the file,  as specified. The bill would, commencing on July 1, 2019, and 
subject to exceptions, require the purchaser of ammunition to be authorized to purchase ammunition by the department, as 
specified. The bill would require the department to cross-reference the Prohibited Aimed Persons File and the Automated 
Firearms System for those transaction purposes. The bill would require, commencing on July  1, 2019, and subject to exceptions, 
that only persons listed in the Automated Fireaims System, or who purchase a one-time ammunition transaction license from the 
department, would be able to purchase ammunition. A violation of these provisions would be a crime. 

The bill would, if the proposed Safety for All Act of2016 is not enacted by the voters at the November 8, 2016, statewide general 
election, authorize the depai"tment to accept applications for ammunition vendor licenses, commencing on July  l, 2017. The bill 
would require an ammunition vendor to be licensed, commencing on January l, 2018,  in  order to sell ammunition. The bill would 
create an application process for ammunition vendors, as specified. The bill would establish the Ammunition Special Account, 
into which vendor license fees and ammunition transaction fees would be deposited and made available, upon appropriation by 
the Legislature, to the department for purposes of enforcing the ammunition vendor licensing ai1d ammunition purchasing 
provisions. The bill would require the ammunition vendor to conduct business at the location specified in the license, except in 
the case of gun shows or events, as specified. The bill would require ammunition sales at a gun show or event to comply with 
certain requirements pertaining to ainmunition transfers and recordkeeping, the violation of which is a crime. 

(9) By expanding existing crimes ai1d  creating new crimes, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program. 

(10) The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by 
the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement. 

This bill would provide that with regard to certain mandates no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason. 

With regard to any other mandates, this bill would provide that, if the Commission on State Mandates dete1mines that the bill 
contains costs so mandated by the state, reimbursement for those costs shall be made pursuant to the statutory provisions noted 
above. 

DIGEST KEY 

Vote: MAJORJTY  Appropriation:  YES  Fiscal Committee:  YES  Local Prograin: YES 

BILL TEXT 

THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS: 


SECTION 1. 

Section 11106.5 is added to the Penal Code, to read: 

11106.5. 
(a) In  addition to the requirements of Section  11106, the Attorney General shall keep and properly file a complete record of both 
ofthe following: 

(1) Ammunition vendor license information pursuant to Article 3 ( cormnencing with Section 30345) of Chapter 1 of Division 10 
of Title 4 of Part 6. 

(2) Infom1ation required by Section 30369. 

(b) If the conditions of paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of Section 11106 are met, an officer refe1Ted to in paragraphs (1) to (6), 
inclusive, of subdivision (b) of Section 11105 may disseminate the fact of any ammunition purchases by the subject ofa state 
summary criminal history record based on info1mation supplied by the department pursuant to Section 30352. 

SEC. 2. 

Section 16150 o:fthe Penal Code is a.mended to read: 

16150. 
(a) As used in this pa.rt, except as specified in subdivision (b), "ammunition" means one or more loaded cartridges consisting ofa 
primer case, propellant, and with one or more projectiles. "Ammunition" does not include blanks. 

(b) As used in subdivision (a) of Section 30305 and in Section 30306, "ammunition" includes, but is not limited to, any bullet, 
cartridge, magazine, clip, speed loader, autoloader, or projectile capable of being fired from a firearm with a deadly consequence. 
"Ammunition" does not include blanks. 

SEC. 3. 

Section 16151  is added to the Penal Code, to read: 

16151. 
Cormnencing January 1, 2018, as used in this part, "ammunition vendor" means any person, firm,  corporation, dealer, or any 
other business that has a current an1munition vendor license issued pursuant to Section 30345. 

SEC. 4. 

Section 16650 of the Penal Code is repealed. 

SEC. 5. 

Section 16662 of the Penal Code is repealed. 

SEC.6. 

Section 17315 of the Penal Code is an1ended to read: 

17315. 
As used in Article 2 ( commencing with Section 30300), Article 3 ( commencing with Section 30345), Article 4 ( cormnencing 
with Section 30355), and Article 5 (commencing with Section 30360) of Chapter 1 of Division IO  of Title 4, "vendor" means an 
ammunition vendor. 

SEC. 7. 

Section 30000 ofthe Penal Code is amended to read: 

30000. 
(a) The Attorney General shall establish and maintain an online database to be known as the Prohibited Armed Persons File. The 
purpose of the file is to cross-reference persons who have ownership or possession ofa firearm on or after January I, 1996, as 
indicated by a record in the Consolidated Firearms Information System, and who, subsequent to the date ofthat ownership or 
possession o:fa firearm,  fall  within a class of persons who are prohibited from owning or possessing a fireaim. 

(b) Commencing July 1, 2019, the file shall also be used to cross-reference persons who attempt to acquire ammunition to 
dctennine if those persons fall within a class of persons who are prohibited from owning or possessing ammunition. 

(c) The information contained in the Prohibited Am1ed Persons File shall only be available to those entities specified in, and 
pursuant to, subdivision (b) or ( c) of Section 11105, through the California Law Enforcement Telecommunications System, for 
the purpose of determining if persons are armed and prohibited from possessing fireai1ns. 

SEC.8. 

Section 30306 of the Penal Code is amended to read: 

30306. 
(a) Any person, corporation, firm, or other business enterprise who supplies, delivers, sells, or gives possession or control of. any 
ammunition to any person who he or she knows or using reasonable care should know is prohibited from owning, possessing, or 
having under custody or control, any ammunition or reloaded ammunition pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 30305, is 
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding one year, or a fine not exceeding one 
thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that tine and imprisonment. 

(b) Any person, corporation, finn,  or other business enterprise who supplies, delivers, sells, or gives possession or control of 
ammunition to a person who the person, corporation, finn,  or other business enterprise knows or has cause to believe is not the 
actual purchaser or trai1sferee ofthe ammunition, with knowledge or cause to believe that the ammunition is to be subsequently 
sold or trai,sferred to a person who is prohibited from  owning, possessing, or having under custody or control any ammunition or 
reloaded ammunition pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 30305, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that fine 
and imprisonment. 

(c) The provisions of this section ai·e cumulative and shall not be construed as restricting the application of any other law. 
However, an act or omission punishable in different ways by this section and another provision of law shall not be punished 
under more than one provision. 

SEC. 9. 

Section 30312 of the Penal Code is repealed. 

SEC. IO. 

Article 3 (commencing with Section 30345) of Chapter 1 of Division 10 of Title 4 of Part 6 ofthe Penal Code is repealed. 

SEC.11. 

Article 3 ( commencing with Section 30345) is added to Chapter 1 of Division 10 ofTitle 4 of Part 6 of the Penal Code, to read: 

Article  3. Ammunition Vendor License 
30345. 

(a) Commencing January l, 2018, only an ammunition vendor who is licensed by the Department of Justice shall be authorized 
to sell ammunition in this state, except as provided by Article 5 (commencing with Section 30360). 

(b) Subdivision (a) does not apply to the sale of ammunition by any ofthe following: 

(J) A commercial hunting club, as defined in  Section 3240.5 of the Fish and Game Code, provided the ammunition is used and 
consumed on the licensed premises while engaged in  lawful hunting activity. 

(2) A domesticated game bird hunting club, pursuant to Section 3270 of the Fish and Game Code ..  provided the ammunition is 
used and consumed on the licensed premises while engaged in lawful hunting activity. 

(3) A domesticated migratory game bird shooting club, pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with  Section 3300) of Chapter 2 of 
Part 1 of Division 4 ofthe Fish and Game Code, provided the ammunition is used and consumed on the licensed premises while 
engaged in lawful hunting activity. 

(4) A nonprofit mutual or public benefit corporation organized pursuant to the Corporations Code that engages in recreational 
shooting and lawful hunting activity provided that the ammunition is used and consumed during the shooting or hunting event 
conducted by that nonprofit or public benefit corporation. 

(5) A target facility that holds a business or regulatory license provided that the ammunition is at all times kept within the 
facility's premises and used on the premises. 

(6) A person who sells no more than  100 rounds of ammunition to one vendor in one month  or cumulatively sells no more than 
250 rounds per year to vendors in this state. 

(c) The Department of Justice is authorized to issue ammunition vendor licenses pursuant to this article. The department shall. 
commencing July  l, 2017, accept applications for ammunition vendor licenses. The department shall issue a license or deny the 
application for a license within 60 days of receipt of the application in the first two years of implementation, and within 30 days 
thereafter. If the application is denied, the depa11ment shall infonn the applicant of the reason for denial in writing. 

(d) The an1mtmition vendor license shall be issued in a fonn prescribed by the Attorney General and shall be valid for a period of 
one year. The license shall allow the licensee to sell anmmnition from a fixed  l.ocation and at any place set forth in  subdivision 
(b) of Section 30365. 

30346. 
(a) The department may charge ammunition vendor license applicants a fee sufficient to cover the reasonable costs of issuing a 
ce11ificate of eligibility, as described, except for those persons or entities described in subdivision (d) of Section 30347. 

(b) The foes received by the department pursuant to this ai1icle shall be deposited in the Ammunition Special Account, which is 
hereby created. The revenue in the fund shall be available, upon appropriation by the Legislature. for use by the Department of 
Justice for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this article, Article 4 (commencing with Section 30355) 
and Article 5 (commencing with Section 30360). 

30347. 
(a) The department is authorized to issue ammunition vendor licenses to ammunition vendors who the department has 
determined are not prohibited by state or federal law from possessing, receiving, owning, or purchasing a fireaim and who have a 
certificate of eligibility issued by the department. 

(b) The depai1ment shall require ai1y agent or employee of a vendor who handles, sells, or delivers rumnunition to obtain and 
provide to the ammunition vendor a certificate of eligibility from the Department of Justice pursuant to Section 26710. On the 
application for the certificate, the agent or employee shall provide the name and California ammunition vendor number ofthe 
vendor with whom the person is employed. 

(c) In the case of an entity other than a natural person, the department shall issue the license to the business entity, pursuant to the 
requirements in subdivisions (a) and (b). 

(d) The department shall, upon request and in  a manner prescribed by the department, issue ammunition vendor licenses to the 
following: 

(1) A firearms dealer licensed pursuant to Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive. 

(2) A person who is on the centrnlized list of federal  firearn1s  l.icensees maintained by the department pursuant to Article 6 
( commencing with Section 28450) of Chapter 6 of Division 6. 

(3) A gunsmith as defined  in Section 16630. 

(4) A wholesaler as defined in Section  17340. 

(5) A manufacturer or importer of firearms or ammunition licensed pursuant to Chapter 44 ( commencing with Section 921) of 
Title 18 of the United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(e) The department shall keep a registry of all licensed ammunition vendors. 

(f) The department shall revoke the license of any ammunition vendor who violates this article, Article 4 (commencing with 
Section 30355), or Atticle 5 (commencing with Section 30360) in any combination three times. The ammunition vendor shall 
thereafter be pennanently ineligible for an ammunition vendor license. 

SEC.12. 

Section 30352 of the Penal Code, as proposed to be amended by the Safety for All Act of2016 at the November 8, 2016, 
statewide general election, is amended to read: 

30352. 
(a) Commencing July 1, 2019, an ammunition vendor shall not sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any ammunition without 
at the time of delivery, legibly recording the following infonnation on a form to be prescribed by the Department of Justice: 

(1) The date of the sale or other transfer. 

(2) The purchaser's or transferee's driver's license or other identification number and the state in which it was issued. 

(3) The brand, type, and amount of ammunition sold or otherwise transfen-ed. 

(4) The purchaser's or transferee's full  name and signature. 

(5) The name of the salesperson who processed the sale or other transaction. 

(6) The purchaser's or tTansferee's full residential address and telephone number. 

(7) The purchaser's or transferee's date of birth. 

(b) Co1mnencing July 1, 2019, an ammunition vendor shall electronically submit to the department the infonnation required by 
subdivision ( a) for all sales and transfers of ownership of ammunition. The department shall retain this information in a database 
to be known as the Ammunition Purchase Records File. This information shall remain confidential and may be used by the 
department and those entities specified in, and pursuant to, subdivision (b) or ( c) of Section 11105, through the California Law 
Enforcement Telecommunications System, only for law enforcement purposes. The ammunition vendor shall not use, sell, 
disclose, or share the infonnation for any other purpose other than the submission required by this subdivision without the 
express written consent of the purchaser or transferee. 

(c) Commencing on July 1, 2019, only those persons listed in this subdivision, or those persons or entities listed in subdivision 
( e ),  shall be authorized to purchase aimnunition. Prior to delivering ai1y aimnunition, an ammunition vendor shall require bona 
fide evidence of identity to veri:fY that the person who is receiving delivery of the ammunition is a person or entity listed in 
subdivision (e) or one of the following: 

(1) A person authorized to purchase ammunition pursuant to  Section 303 70. 

(2) A person who was approved by the department to receive a firearm from the ammunition vendor, pursuant to Section 28220, 
ifthat vendor is a licensed firearms dealer, and the ammunition is delivered to the person in the same transaction as the firearm. 

(d) Commencing July  1, 2019, the ammunition vendor shall verify with the department, in  a manner prescribed by the 
department, that the person is authorized to purchase ammunition. If the person is not listed as an authorized ammunition 
purchaser, the vendor shall deny the sale or transfer. 

(e) Subdivisions ( a) and ( d) shall not apply to sales or other transfers of ownership of ammunition by anrnmnition vendors to any 
of the following,  if properly identified: 

(I) An ammunition vendor. 

(2) A person who is on the centralized list of exempted federal firearms licensees maintained by the department pursuant to 
Article 6 (commencing ·with  Section 28450) of Chapter 6 of Division 6. 

(3) A person who purchases or receives ammunition at a target facility holding a business or other regulatory license, provided 
that the ammunition is at all times kept within the facility's premises. 

(4) A gunsmith. 

(5) A wholesaler. 

(6) A manufacnlfer or importer of firearms or ammunition licensed pursuant to Chapter 44 ( co1mnencing with Section 921) of 
Title 18 of the United States Code, and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(7) An  authorized law enforcement representative ofa city, county,  city and county, or state or federal government, ifthe sale or 
other transfer of ownership is for exclusive use by that government agency, and,  prior to the sale, delivery, or transfer ofthe 
handgun ammunition, ~Titten authorization from the head of the agency authorizing the transaction is presented to the person 
from whom the purchase, delivery, or transfer is being made. Proper written authorization is defined as verifiable written 
certification from the head o:fthe agency by  which the purchaser, transferee, or person otherwise acquiring ownership is 
employed, identifying the employee as an individual authorized to conduct the transaction, and authorizing the transaction for the 
exclusive use o:fthe agency by which that individual is employed. 

(8) (A) A properly identified sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) ofTitie 3 of Part 2, 
or properly identified sworn :federal law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry a fiream1  in the course and scope of the 
officer's duties. 

(B) (i) Proper identification is defined as verifiable written certification from the head ofthe agency by which the purchaser or 
transferee is employed, identifying the purchaser or transferee as a full-time paid peace officer who is authorized to carry a 
firearm  in  the course and scope ofthe officer's duties. 

(ii) The certification shall be delivered to the vendor at the time of purchase or transfer and the purchaser or transferee shall 
provide bona fide evidence of identity to verify that he or she is the person authorized in the certification. 

(iii) The vendor shall keep the certification with the record of sale and submit the certification to the department. 

(t) The department is auth01ized to  adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this section. 

SEC.13. 

Article 4 (commencing with  Section 30355) is added to Chapter l  of Division 10 of Title 4 of Part 6 of the Penal Code, to read: 

Article  4. Ammunition Purchase Authorization 
30355. 

(a) Any person who violates any provision o:fthis article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail 
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that fine and imprisonment. 

(b) The provisions ofthis article are cumulative and shall not be construed as restricting the application of any other law. 
However, an act or omission punishable in different ways by different provisions of law shall not be punished under more than 
one provision. 

30356. 
(a) Commencing July  I, 2019, the department shall electronically approve the purchase or transfer of ammunition through a 
vendor, as defined in  Section  1615 .I. except as otherwise specified. This approval shall occur at the time of purchase or transfer, 
prior to the purchaser or transferee taking possession of the ammunition. 

(b) To detennine if the purchaser or transferee is eligible to purchase or possess ammunition, the department shall cross-reference 
the ammunition purchaser's or transferee's name, date of birth, current address, and driver's license or other government 
identification number, as described in  Section 28180, with the information maintained in the Automated Firearms System (AFS). 
If the purchaser's or transferee's information does not match an AFS entry, the transaction shall be denied. Ifthe purchaser's or 
transferee's information matches an AFS entry, the department shall determine if the purchaser or transferee falls within a class 
of persons who are prohibited from owning or possessing an1munition by cross-referencing the Prohibited Armed Persons File. If 
the purchaser or transferee is prohibited from o-wning or possessing a :firearm, the transaction shall be denied. 

(c) A vendor is prohibited from providing a purchaser or transferee ammunition without department approval.  Ifa vendor cannot 
electronically verify a person's eligibility to purchase or possess animunition via an Internet connection, the department shall 
provide a telephone line to verify eligibility. This option is available to ammunition vendors who can demonstrate legitimate 
geographical and telecommunications limitations in submitting the information electronically and who are approved by the 
department to use the telephone line verification. 

(d) The department shall recover the reasonable cost ofregulatory and enforcement activities related to this article by charging 
ammunition purchasers and transferees a per transaction fee not to exceed one dollar ($1), provided, however, that the fee may be 
increased at a rate not to exceed any increases in the California Consumer Price Index as compiled and reported by the 
Department of Industrial Relations, not to exceed the reasonable regulatory and enforcement costs. The fees shall be deposited in 
the Ammunition Special Account, to be available upon approp1iation by the Legislature, for use by the Department of Justice for 
the purpose of implementing and enforcing this article, Article 3 ( commencing with Section 30345), and Article 5 ( commencing 
with Section 30360). 

(e) This section shall not apply to the sale, delivery, or tTansfer of ammunition to any of the following, if properly identified prior 
to the delivery of the ammunition by the vendor: 

(1) A :firearms dealer licensed pursuant to Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive. 

(2) A person who is on the centrnlized list of federal  fiream1s  licensees maintained by the department pursuant to Articl.e 6 
( commencing ,vith Section 28450) of Chapter 6 of Division 6. 

(3) A gunsmith as defined in Section 16630. 

(4) A wholesaler as defined in Section 17340. 

(5) A manufacturer or importer of firearms or ammunition licensed pursuant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of 
Title 18 of the United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(6) All ammunition vendor. 

(7) A person whose licensed premises are outside of this state and who is licensed as a dealer or collector offireanns pursuant to 
Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of Title 18 of the United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(8) A person who is licensed as a collector of fireanns pursuant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of Title 18 of the 
United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto, whose licensed premises are within this state, and who has a 
current ce1tificate of eligibility issued by the department pursuant to Section 26710. 

(9) An authorized law enforcement representative of a city, county, city and county, or state or federal government, if the sale or 
other transfer is for exclusive use by that government agency, and, prior to the sale, delivery, or transfer of the ammunition, 
written authorization from the head of the agency authorizing the transaction is presented to the person from whom the purchase, 
delivery, or transfer is being made. Proper ~Titten authorization is defined as verifiable vvTitten certification from the head ofthe 
agency, or designee, by which the purchaser, transferee, or person otherwise acquiring ownership is employed, identif}ing the 
employee as an individual authorized to conduct the transaction, and authorizing the transaction for the exclusive use of the 
agency by which that individual is employed. 

(10) A properly identified sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commendng with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 or 
properly identified sworn member of a federal law enforcement agency who is authorized to cany a firearm in the course ru1d 
scope of the officer's duties. 

(11) A target facility that holds a business or regulatory license. 

(12) A person who purchases or receives aimnunition at a target facility holding a business or other regulatory license, provided 
that the ammunition is at all times kept within the facility's premises and used on the premises. 

(13) A commercial hunting club, as defined in  Section 3240.5 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(14) A domesticated grune bird hunting club, pursuant to Section 3270 ofthe Fish and Game Code. 

(15) A domesticated migratory game bird shooting club, pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with Section 3300) of Chapter 2 of 
Pait 1 of Division 4 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(16) A participant at a shooting or hunting event conducted by any ofthe following: 

(A) A commercial hunting club, as  defined in Section 3240.5 of the Fish and Grune Code, provided the ammunition is used and 
consumed on the licensed premises while engaged in lawful hunting activity. 

(B) A domesticated game bird hunting club, pursuant to Section 3270 of the Fish and Grune Code, provided the ammunition is 
used and consumed on the licensed premises while engaged in lawful hunting activity. 

(C) A domesticated migratory game bird shooting club, pursuant to A1ticle 4 ( commencing with Section 3300) of Chapter 2 of 
Part l  of Division 4 of the Fish and Game Code, provided the ammunition is used and consumed on the licensed premises while 
engaged in  lawful hunting activity. 

(17) A nonprofit mutual or public benefit corporation organized pursuru1t to the Corporations Code that engages in recreational 
shooting and lawful hunting activity. 

(18) A participant at a shooting or hunting event conducted by a nonprofit mutual or public benefit corporation organized 
pursuant to the Corporations Code that engages in recreational shooting or lawfi1l hunting activity provided that the ammunition 
is used and consumed during the event. 

(19) A person who is authorized to carry loaded firearms pursuant to Section 25900, 25905, 25910, 25925, 26010, 26015, 26025, 
or 26030. 

(20) A holder of a special weapons permit issued by the department pursuant to Section 32650 or 33300, pursuant to Article 3 
(commencing with Section 18900) of Chapter 1 of Division 5 of Title 2, or pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with  Section 
32700) of Chapter 6. 

(21) A holder of a valid entertainment firearms permit issued pursuru1t to Chapter 2 ( commencing with Section 29500) of 
Division 8. 

(22) A person authorized by the department pursuant to  Section 30357. 

(23) A person who has a cmTent certificate of eligibility issued by the department pursuant to Section 26710. 

30357. 
The department shall develop a procedure in which a person who is not prohibited from purchasing or possessing ammunition 
may be approved for a single ammunition transaction or purchase. The department shall recover the cost of processing, 
regulat01y, and enforcement activities related to this section by charging the ammunition transaction or purchase applicant a fee 
not to exceed the fee charged for the department's Dealers' Record of Sale (DROS) process, as described in Section 28225, and 
not to exceed the department's reasonable costs. 

SEC.14. 

Article 5 (commencing with Section 30360) is added to Chapter 1 of Division 10 of Title 4 of Part 6 of the Penal Code, to read: 

Article  5. Ammunition Sales 
30360. 
(a) Any person who violates any provision ofthis a1ticle is guilty ofa misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail 
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000). or by both that fine and imprisonment. 

(b) The provisions of this article are cumulative and shall not be construed as restricting the application of any other law. 
However, an act or omission punishable in different ways by different provisions of law shall not be punished under more than 
one provision. 

30362. 
A vendor shall not permit any employee who the vendor knows or reasonably should know is a person described in Chapter 2 
(commencing with Section 29800) or Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 29900) of Division 9 of this title, or Section 8100 or 
8103 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, to handle, sell, tir deliver aimnunition or to deliver or have under his or her custody or 
control ammunition in  the course and scope of employment 

30363. 
A vendor shall not sell or otherwise transfer ownership of, offer for sale, or otherwise offer to transfer ownership of, display for 
sale, or display for transfer any ammunition in a manner that allows that ammunition to be accessible to a purchaser or transferee 
without the assistance of the vendor or an employee ofthe vendor. 

30364. 
(a) The sale, delivery, or transfer of ammunition may only occur in a face-to-face transaction with  the seller, deliverer, or 
transferor being provided bona fide evidence of identity from the purchaser or other transferee, provided, however, that 
ammunition may be purchased over the Internet or through other means ofremote ordering if an ammunition vendor in this state 
initially receives the aimnunition and processes the trai1sfer in compliance with this article, Aiticle 3 ( c01mnencing with Section 
30345), and Article 4 ( commencing with Section 30355). An aimnunition vendor is required to promptly and properly process 
those transactions.  An ammunition vendor may charge a fee to process the transfer not to exceed ten dollars ($10) per transaction. 
An ammunition vendor is not required to house ammunition orders longer than 30 days. 

(b) Subdivision (a) shall not apply to or afiect the sale, delivery, or trai1sfer of ammunition to any of the following: 

(1) A firearms dealer licensed pursuant to  Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive. 

(2) A person who is on the centralized list offederal firearms  licensees maintained by the Depaitment of Justice pursuant to 
Aiticle 6 (commencing with Section 28450) of Chapter 6 of Division 6. 

(3) A gunsmith as defined in  Section  16630. 

(4) A wholesaler as defined in Section 17340. 

(5) A manufacturer or importer of firearms or ainmunition licensed pUl'suant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of 
Title 18 of the United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

l6) An  ammunition vendor. 

(7) A person whose licensed premises are outside this state and who is licensed as a dealer or collector offireanns pursuant to 
Chapter 44 ( commencing with Section 921) of Title 18 ofthe United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(8) A person who  is licensed as a collector offireanns pursuant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of Title 18 of the 
United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto, whose licensed premises are within this state, and who has a 
current certificate of eligibility issued by the Department of Justice pursuant to Section 26710. 

(9) An authorized law enforcement representative of a city, county, city and county, or state or federal government, if the sale, 
delivery, or other transfer is for exclusive use by that government agency and, prior to the sale, delivery, or transfer of the 
ammunition, \vTitten authorization is received from the head of the agency, or designee, by which the purchaser, transferee, or 
person otherwise acquiring ownership is employed, identifying the employee as an  individual authorized to conduct the 
transaction, and authoiizing the transaction for the exclusive use ofthe agency employing the individual. 

(10) A properly identified sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 ( commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2, or 
properly identified sworn member of a federal  law enforcement agency who is authoiized to carry a firearm  in the course and 
scope of the officer's duties. 

(11) A target facility holding a business or other regulatory license. 

(12) A commercial hunting club, as defined in Section 3240.5 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(13) A domesticated game bird hunting club, pursuant to Section 3270 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(14) A domesticated migratory game bird shooting club, pursuant to Aiiicle 4 ( commencing with Section 3300) of Chapter 2 of 
Part 1 of Division 4 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(15) A nonprofit mutual or public benefit corporation organized pursuant to the Corporations Code that engages in recreational 
shooting and lawfi.Jl hunting activity. 

(16) A consultant-evaluator. 

(17) A contract or common carrier or an authorized agent or employee thereof, when acting in conformance with applicable 
federal law. 

30365. 
(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b ), the sale of ammunition shall be conducted at the location specified in the license. 

(b) A vendor may sell ammunition at a gun show or event, as described in Chapter 3 ( commencing with Section 27200) of 
Division 6,  if the gun show or event is not conducted from  any motorized or towed vehicle. 

(c) Sales of ammunition at a gun show or event shall comply with Sections 30345, 30356, 30369, and 30370. 

30366. 
(a) When neither pa11y  in an ammunition sale is a vendor, the following shall apply: 

(1) The seller shall deliver the ammunition to a vendor to process the transaction. 

(2) The vendor shall then promptly and properly deliver the ammunition to the purchaser, if the sale is not prohibited, as if the 
ammunition were the vendor's own merchandise. 

(3) If the vendor cannot legally deliver the ammunition to the purchaser, the vendor shall forthwith return the ammunition to the 
seller. This return is not subject to Section 30356. 

(b) The vendor may charge the purchaser an administrative fee to process the transaction, not to exceed ten dollars ($1 O) per 
transaction processed. 

(c) A person selLing ammunition pursuant to this section is exempt from the requirement to be licensed pursuant to Section 
30345. 

(d) This section does not apply to a person whose premises are outside of this state when directly selling and shipping 
a1mnunition to a law enforcement agency within this state. 

30367. 
(a) Notwithstanding Sections 30345 and 30366, the sale of ammunition between the following is authorized so long as it does 
not exceed 50 rounds per month: 

(!) The sale of ammunition between licensed hunters while engaged in  lawful hunting activity. 

(2) The sale of ammunition benveen immediate family members, spouses, or registered domestic prutners. 

(b) Notwithstanding Sections 30345 and 30366, the sale of ammunition by a private individual to an authorized representative of 
a city. city and county, county, state, or the federal government, as pait of a vo.luntary program is authorized. 

(c) Ammunition acquired pursuru1t to subdivision (b) shall be disposed of in the same maimer as set fotth for fireaims in Section 
18000, 18005,or34000. 

30368. 
(a) Conm1encing July 1, 2019, a resident ofthis state shall not bring or transport into this state ru1y aimnunition that he or she 
purchased from outside of this state unless he or she first has that ammunition delivered to an ainmunition vendor in this state for 
delivery to that resident pursuai1t to the procedures set forth in Section 30366. 

(b) Subdivision (a) does not apply to any of the following bringing or transporting into this state any ammunition: 

(I) A fireai·ms  dealer licensed pursuant to Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive. 

(2) A person who is on the centralized list of federal fireanns licensees maintained by the department pursuant to Article 6 
(commencing with Section 28450) of Chapter 6 of Division 6. 

(3) A gunsmith as defined in Section 16630. 

(4) A wholesaler as defined in  Section  17340. 

(5) A maimfacturer or importer offireai·ms or ammunition licensed pursuant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of 
Title 18 ofthe United States Code, and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(6) An ammunition vendor. 

(7) A person who is licensed as a collector of firearms pursuant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of Title 18 of the 
United States Code and the regulations issued pursuai1t thereto, whose licensed premises are within this state, and .vho has a 
cmTent certificate of eligibility issued by the Depaitment of Justice pursuant to Section 26710. 

(8) Authorized law enforcement representatives of cities, counties, cities and counties, or state or federal governments for 
exclusive use by those government agencies if, prior to the importation, the person has VvTitten authorization from the head ofthe 
agency authorizing the acquisition of that ammunition. Proper written authorization is defined as verifiable written ce1tification 
from the head ofthe agency, or designee, by which the person is employed, identifying the employee as an individual authorized 
to acquire and import ammunition, and authorizing the transaction for the exclusive use of the agency by which he or she is 
employed. 

(9) A properly identified sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2, or 
properly identified sworn member of a federal law enforcement agency who is authorized to can}' a firearm in the course and 
scope of the officer's duties. 

(1 O)  A contract or common carrier or an  authorized agent or employee thereof,  when acting in conformity with applicable :federal 
law. 

(11) A person who purchases the ammunition from an immediate family member, spouse, or registered domestic partner ifthe 
person brings or transports into this state no more than 50 rounds. 

(12) The executor or administrator of an estate that includes ammunition. 

(13) A person that at the time he or she acquired the ammunition was not a resident of this state. 

(14) Ammunition that is imported into this country pursuant to provisions of Section 925(a)(4) of Title 18 of the United States 
Code. 

(15) A licensed hunter who purchased the ammunition outside of this state for use in a la1,vful hunting activity that occurred 
outside of this state ifthe person brings or imports no more than 50 rounds into this state and the ammunition is designed and 
intended for use in the firearm the hunter used in that hunting activity. 

(16) A person who attended and participated in an organized competitive match or league competition that involves the use of 
firearms in a match or competition sponsored by, conducted under the auspices of, or approved by,  a law enforcement agency or 
a nationally or state recognized entity that fosters proficiency in, or promotes education about, firearms, and the person brings or 
imports into this state no more than 50 rounds of ammunition designed and intended to be used in the fireann the person used in 
the match or competition. 

30369. 
(a) Commencing July  l, 2019, a vendor shall not sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any ammunition without, at the time of 
delivery, legibly recording the following information: 

(1) The purchaser's full name. 

(2) The purchaser's or transferee's driver's license or other identification number and the state in which it was issued 

(3) The date of the sale or other transaction. 

(4) The brand, type, and a.mount of ammunition sold or otherwise transferred. 

(5) The name of the salesperson who processed the sale or other transaction. 

(6) The purchaser's or transferee's full  residential address and telephone number. 

(7) The purchaser's or transferee's date of birth. 

(b) Commencing July  l, 2019, the vendor shall electronically submit to the department the infom1ation required by subdivision 
(a) in a format and a manner prescribed by the department for all sales or other transfers of ammunition. The department shall 
retain this information for two years in a database to be kno~11 as the Ammunition Purchase Records File for the sole purpose of 
aiding and assisting local and state law enforcement agencies in an active investigation. The vendor shall not share any of the 
information required by subdivision (a) for any reason other than for authorized Jaw enforcement purposes. The info1mation in 
the Ammunition Purchase Records File may be accessed by a state or local law enforcement agency only if the department is 
provided a case number or other sufficient information as determined by the department that indicates an active investigation and 
the information sought is for the investigation or prosecution of that case. 

(c) In the case that a vendor cannot submit the infom1ation required by subdivision ( a) electronically via an Internet connection, 
the department shall provide a telephone line to submit the infom,ation if the vendor can demonstrate legitimate geographic and 
telecommunications limitations to submitting the information electronically, and the department approves the vendor's use of the 
telephone line. 

(d) This section shall not apply to or affect sales or other transfers of ammunition by ammunition vendors to any of the following, 
if properly identified: 

­
(l) A firearms dealer licensed pursuant to  Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive. 

(2) A person who is on the centralized list of federal firea1ms  licensees maintained by the department pursuant to Article 6 
(commencing with Section 28450) of Chapter 6 of Division 6. 

(3) A gunsmith as defined in  Section 16630. 

(4) A wholesaler as defined in Section 17340. 

(5) A manufacturer or importer of firearms licensed pursuant to Chapter 44 (commencing with Section 921) of Title 18 of the 
United States Code and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 

(6) An ammunition vendor. 

(7) An authorized law enforcement representative of a city, county, city and county, or state or federal government, if the sale or 
other transfer is fi.H· exclusive use by that government agency, and, prior to the sale, delivery, or transfer of the ammunition, 
written authorization :from the head ofthe agency. or designee, authorizing the transaction is presented to the person from  whom 
the purchase, delivery, or transfer is being made. Proper written authorization is defined as verifiable -wTitten certification from 
the head of the agency, or designee, by which the purchaser, transferee, or person otherwise acquiring ownership is employed, 
identifying the employee as an individual authorized to conduct the transaction, and authorizing the transaction for the exclusive 
use of the agency by which that individual is employed. 

(8) A properly identified sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2, or 
properly identified sworn member of a federal law enforcement agency who is authorized to cany a firearm in the course and 
scope ofthe officer's duties. 

(9) A target facility that holds a business or regulatmy license. 

(10) A person who purchases or receives ammunition at a target facility holding a business or other regulatory license, provided 
that the ammunition is at all times kept within the facility's premises and used on the premises. 

(l l) A commercial hunting club, as defined in Section 3240.5 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(12) A domesticated game bird hunting club, pursuant to  Section 3270 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(13) A domesticated migratory game bird shooting club, pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with Section 3300) of Chapter 2 of 
Part 1 of Division 4 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(14) A participant at a shooting or hunting event conducted by any of the following: 

(A) A commercial hunting club, as defined in Section 3240.5 of the Fish and Grune Code, provided the rumnunition is used and 
consumed on the licensed premises while engaged in lawful hunting activity. 

(B) A domesticated game bird hunting club, pursuru1t to Section 3270 of the Fish and Game Code, provided the runmunition is 
used and consumed on the licensed premises while engaged in lawful hunting activity. 

(C) A domesticated migratory gan1e bird shooting club, pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with Section 3300) of Chapter 2 of 
Part l  of Division 4 of the Fish and Game Code, provided the ammunition is used and consumed on the licensed premises while 
engaged in  lawful hunting activity. 

(15) A nonprofit mutual or public benefit corporation organized pursuru1t to the Corporations Code that engages in recreational 
shooting and lawfol hunting activity. 

(16) A participant at a shooting or hunting event conducted by a nonprofit mutual or public benefit corporation organized 
pursuant to the Corporations Code that engages in recreational shooting or lav,rfol hunting activity provided that the ammunition 
is used  and  consumed during the event. 

30370. 
A  vendor shall not knowingly make a false entry or fail to make a required entry of information in accordance with Section 
30369. 

SEC.15. 

Section 30370 is added to the Penal Code, to read: 

30370. 
(a) Commencing July 1, 2019, the depaitment shall electronically approve the purchase or transfer of ammunition through a 
vendor, as defined in Section 1615 l, except as otherwise specified. This approval shall occur at the time of purchase or transfer, 
prior to the purchaser or transferee taking possession of the ammunition. Pursuant to the authorization specified in paragraph ( l) 
of subdivision ( c) of Section 30352, the following persons are authorized to purchase ammunition: 

(1) A purchaser or trai1sferee whose information matches an entry in the Automated Fireai1ns System (AFS) and who is eligible 
to possess an1munition as specified in subdivision (b ). 

(2) A purchaser or transferee who has a current certificate of eligibility issued by the department pursuant to Section 26710. 

(3) A purchaser or transferee who is not prohibited from purchasing or possessing ammunition in  a single ammunition transaction 
or purchase made pursuant to the procedure developed pursuant to subdivision (c). 

(b) To determine if the purchaser or transferee is eligible to  purchase or possess ammunition pursuant to paragraph (I) of 
subdivision (a), the department shall cross-reference the ammunition purchaser's or transferee's name, date of birth, current 
address, and driver's license or other government identification number, as described in Section 28180, with the information 
maintained in the AFS. Ifthe purchaser's or transferee's information does not match an AFS entry, the trai1saction shall be 
denied. Ifthe purchaser's or transferee's information matches ru.1  AFS entry, the department shall detennine if the purchaser or 
transferee falls within a class of persons who are prohibited from  owning or possessing ammunition by cross-referencing with the 
Prohibited Armed Persons File. Ifthe purchaser or transferee is prohibited from owning or possessing a firearm, the transaction 
shall be denied. 

(c) The depaitment shall develop a procedure in which a person who is not prohibited from purchasing or possessing ainmunition 
may be approved for a single ammunition transaction or purchase. The department shall recover the cost of processing and 
regulatory and enforcement activities related to this section by charging the ammunition transaction or purchase applicant a fee 
not to exceed the fee charged for the department's Dealers' Record of Sale (DROS) process, as described in  Section 28225 and 
not to exceed the depaitment's reasonable costs. 

(d) A vendor is prohibited :from providing a purchaser or trai1sferee ammunition without department approval. If a vendor cannot 
electronically verify a person's eligibility to purchase or possess ammunition via an Internet connection, the department shall 
provide a telephone line to verify eligibility. This option is available to ammunition vendors who can demonstrate legitimate 
geographical and telecommunications limitations in submitting the information electronically and who are approved by the 
department to use the telephone line verification. 

(e) The department shall recover the reasonable cost ofregulatory and enforcement activities related to this article by charging 
ammunition purchasers and transferees a per transaction fee not to exceed one dollar ($1), provided, however, that the fee may be 
increased at a rate not to exceed any increases in the California Consumer Price Index as compiled and rep01ted by the 
Department of Industrial Relations. not to exceed the reasonable regulatory ai1d enforcement costs. 

(f) A fund to be known as the "Ammunition Safety and Enforcement Special Fund" is  hereby created within the State Treasury. 
All fees received pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the Ammunition Safety and Enforcement Special Fund and, 
notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, are continuously appropriated for purposes of implementing, operating, 
and enforcing the ammunition authorization progran1 provided for in this section and Section 30352 and for repaying the strut-up 
loan provided :for in  Section 30371. 

(g) The Department of Justice is authorized to adopt regulations to implement this section. 

SEC.16. 

Section 30370 of the Penal Code, as proposed to be added by the Safety for All Act of 2016 at the November 8, 2016, statewide 
general election, is repealed. 

SEC.17. 

No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to  Section 6 ofArticle XIII B of the California Constitution for certain costs 
that may be incurred by a local agency or school district because, in that regard, this act creates a new crime or infraction, 
eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the 
Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California 
Constitution. 

However, if the Commission on State Mandates detennines that this act contains other costs mandated by the state, 
reimbursement to  local agencies and school districts for those costs shall be made pursuant to Part 7 ( commencing with Section 
17500) of Division 4 of Title 2 ofthe Government Code. 

SEC.18. 

The Legislature finds and  declares that Section 13  of this act, which adds Section 30369 to the Penal Code, imposes a limitation 
on the public's right of access to the meetings of public bodies or the writings of public officials and agencies within the meaning 
of Section 3 of Article I of the California Constitution. Pursuant to that constitutional provision, the Legislature makes the 
following findings to  demonstrate the interest protected by this limitation and the need for protecting that interest: 

In order to protect the personal information of ammunition purchasers, it is necessary that this act limit the public's right of 
access to that information. 

SEC.19. 

(a) Sections 12,  15, and 16 ofthis act shall only become operative if the Safety for All Act of2016 is enacted by the voters at the 
November 8, 2016, statewide general election and becomes effective, in which case Sections 1, 2,  3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,  10, 11, 13, 
and 14 shall not become operative. 

(b) The Legislature finds and declares that the intent expressed in the Safety for All  Act of2016 is  to safeguard the ability of law­
abiding, responsible Californians to own and use firearms for lawful means while requiring background checks for ammunition 
purchases in the manner required for fireann purchases so that neither firearms nor ammunition are getting into the hands of 
dangerous individuals. The Legislature finds and declares that the amendments to the Safety for All  Act of2016 made by 
Sections 12,  15, and 16 are consistent with and further that intent. The amendments ensure that only law-abiding, responsible 
Californians who appear in the Automated Firearms System are able to purchase ammunition for their legally owned firearn1s 
while violent felons and the dangerously mentally ill who appear in the Armed Prohibited Persons System are not. 

