·CONTACT INFO 

AND REQUEST FOR TITLE AND SUMMARY 

17-0031 

RECEIVED

SEP  12  2017

Walter S.  Glass II,  President, Non-Profit Americans for a New Social Contract, 6193 
Wunderlin Ave San Diego Ca.  92114; phone 619-578-2539. This letter serves the 
purpose of also requesting  the state to prepare a title and summary for the initiative. 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

17-0031 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 1 

INITIATIVE MEASURE TO BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

12-point 
Boldface 
Type 

The Attorney General of California has prepared the following circulating title 

and summary of the chief purpose and points of the proposed measure: 

(Here set forth the unique numeric identifier provided by the Attorney General 

and circulating title and summary prepared by the Attorney General. Both the Attorney 

General's unique numeric identifier and the circulating title and summary must also 

be printed across the top ofeach page ofthe petition whereon signatures are to appear.) 

TO THE HONORABLE SECRETARY OF STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

 

Type: Roman
Boldface not 
smaller than 
12-point 

We, the undersigned, registered, qualified voters of California, residents of 

5AN  Diieg O  County (or City and County), hereby propose amendments to the 

Civil Code, the Family Code, the Financial Code, the Government Code, the Labor 

Code, the Revenue and Taxation Code, and the Vehicle Code, relating to vehicles, and 

petition the Secretary of State to submit the same to the voters of California for their 

adoption or rejection at the next succeeding general election or at any special statewide 

election held prior to that general election or as otherwise provided by law. The proposed 

statutory amendments read as follows: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 2 

SECTION 1.  Section 1785.13 of the Civil Code is  amended to read: 

1785.13.  (a) No consumer credit reporting agency shall make any consumer 

credit report containing any of the following items of information: 

(1) Bankruptcies that, from the date of the order for relief, antedate the report 

by more than  IO  years. 

(2)  Suits and judgments that, from the date of entry or renewal, antedate the 

report by more than seven years or until the governing statute oflimitations has expired, 

whichever is the longer period. 

(3) Unlawful detainer actions, unless the lessor was the prevailing party. For 

purposes of this paragraph, the lessor shall be deemed to be the prevailing party only 

if(A) final judgment was awarded to the lessor (i) upon entry of the tenant's default, 

(ii) upon the granting of the lessor's motion for summary judgment, or (iii) following 

trial, or (B) the action was resolved by a written settlement agreement between the 

parties that states that the unlawful detainer action may be reported. In any other instance 

in which the action is resolved by settlement agreement, the lessor shall not be deemed 

to be the prevailing party for purposes of this paragraph. 

(4) Paid tax liens that, from the date of payment, antedate the report by more 

than seven years. 

(5) Accounts placed for collection or charged to profit and loss that antedate the 

report by more than seven years. 

(6) Records of arrest, indictment, information, misdemeanor complaint, or 

conviction of a crime that, from the date of disposition, release, or parole, antedate the 

report by more than seven years. These items ofinfonnation shall no longer be reported 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 3 

if at any time it is learned that in the case ofa conviction a full pardon has been granted, 

or in the case of an arrest, indictment, information, or misdemeanor complaint a 

conviction did not result. 

(7) Any other adverse information that antedates the report by more than seven 

years. 

(b) The seven-year period specified in paragraphs (5) and (7) of subdivision (a) 

shall commence to  run, with respect to any account that is placed for collection 

(internally or by referral to a third party, whichever is earlier), charged to profit and 

loss, or subjected to  any similar action, upon the expiration of the 180-day period 

beginning on the date of the commencement of the delinquency that immediately 

preceded the collection activity, charge to profit and loss, or similar action. Where 

more than one of these actions is taken with respect to  a particular account, the 

seven-year period specified in paragraphs (5) and (7) shall commence concurrently for 

all these actions on the date of the first of these actions. 

(c) Any consumer credit reporting agency that furnishes a consumer credit report 

containing information regarding any case involving a consumer arising under the 

bankruptcy provisions of Title 11  of the United States Code shall include an 

identification ofthe chapter ofTitle 11  of the United States Code under which the case 

arose ifthat can be ascertained from what was provided to the consumer credit reporting 

agency by the source of the infonnation. 

(d) A consumer credit report shall not include any adverse information concerning 

a consumer antedating the report by more than 10 years or that otherwise is prohibited 

from being included in a consumer credit report. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 4 

(e) If a consumer credit reporting agency is notified by a furnisher of credit 

information that an open-end credit account of the consumer has been closed by the 

consumer, any consumer credit report thereafter issued by the consumer credit reporting 

agency with respect to that consumer, and that includes information respecting that 

account, shall indicate the fact that the consumer has closed the account. For purposes 

of this subdivision, "open-end credit account" does not include any demand deposit 

account, such as a checking account, money market account, or share draft account. 

(f) Consumer credit reporting agencies shall not include medical information in 

their files on consumers or furnish medical information for employment, insurance, or 

credit purposes in a consumer credit report without the consent of the consumer. 

(g) A consumer credit reporting agency shall include in any consumer credit 

report information, ifany, on the failure ofthe consumer to pay overdue child or spousal 

support, where the information either was provided to the consumer credit reporting 

agency pursuant to Section 4752 or has been provided to the consumer credit reporting 

agency and verified by another federal, state, or local governmental agency. 

(h) Notwithstanding any other law, a consumer credit reporting agency shall 

remove all derogatory references and comments regarding late pay, defaults, evictions, 

charge-offs, discharged debt, public debt, utilities, and delinquent debts within 24 

months after the derogatory reference or comment has been on the report of a consumer 

located in this state. 

SEC. 2.  Section 17520 of the Family Code is amended to read: 

17520.  (a) As used in this section: 

(1) "Applicant" means a person applying for issuance or renewal of a license. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 5 

(2) "Board" means an entity specified in Section 101  of the Business and 

Professions Code, the entities referred to in Sections  1000 and 3600 of the Business 

and Professions Code, the State Bar, the Bureau of Real Estate, the Department of 

Motor Vehicles, the Secretary of State, the Department of Fish and Wildlife, and any 

other state commission, department, committee, examiner, or agency that issues a 

license, certificate, credential, permit, registration, or any other authorization to engage 

in a business, occupation, or profession, or to the extent required by federal law or 

regulations, for recreational purposes. This term includes all boards, commissions, 

departments, committees, examiners, entities, and agencies that issue a license, 

certificate, credential, permit, registration, or any other authorization to engage in a 

business, occupation, or profession. The failure to specifically name a particular board, 

commission, department, committee, examiner, entity, or agency that issues a license, 

certificate, credential, permit, registration, or any other authorization to  engage in a 

business, occupation, or profession does not exclude that board, commission, 

department, committee, examiner, entity, or agency from this term. 

(3) "Certified list" means a list provided by the local child support agency to the 

Department of Child Support Services in which the local child support agency verifies, 

under penalty of perjury, that the names contained therein  are support obligors found 

to be out of compliance with a judgment or order for support in a case being enforced 

under Title IV-D of the federal Social Security Act. 

(4)  "Compliance with a judgment or order for support" means that, as set forth 

in a judgment or order for child or family support, the obligor is no more than 30 

calendar days in arrears in making payments in full for current support, in making 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 6 

periodic payments in full, whether court ordered or by agreement with the local child 

support agency, on a support arrearage, or in making periodic payments in full, whether 

court ordered or by agreement with the local child support agency, on a judgment for 

reimbursement for public assistance, or has obtained a judicial finding that equitable 

estoppel as provided in statute or case law precludes enforcement of the order. The 

local child support agency is authorized to use this section to enforce orders for spousal 

support only when the local child support agency is also enforcing a related child 

support obligation owed to the obligee parent by the same obligor, pursuant to Sections 

17400 and 17604. 

(5) "License" includes membership in the State Bar, and a certificate, credential, 

permit, registration, or any other authorization issued by a board that allows a person 

to engage in a business, occupation, or profession, or to  operate a commercial motor 

vehicle, including appointment and commission by the Secretary of State as a notary 

public. "License" also includes any driv er's license issued by  the Department  ofMotor 

Vehicles, ftll')'  commercial fishing license issued by the Department ofFish and Wildlife, 

and to the extent required by federal law or regulations, any license used for recreational 

purposes. This tenn includes all licenses, certificates, credentials, permits, registrations, 

or any other authorization issued by a board that allows a person to engage in a business, 

occupation, or profession. The failure to specifically name a particular type oflicense, 

certificate, credential, permit, registration, or other authorization issued by a board that 

allows a person to  engage in a business, occupation, or profession, does not exclude 

that license, certificate, credential, permit, registration, or other authorization from this 

term. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 7 

(6) "Licensee" means a person holding a license, certificate, credential, permit, 

registration, or other authorization issued by a board, to  engage in a business, 

occupation, or profession, or a commercial driver's license as defined in Section 15210 

of the Vehicle Code, including an appointment and commission by the Secretary of 

State as a notary public. "Licensee" also means a person holding a driv er's license 

issued by the Department of Motor Vehieles, a person holding a commercial fishing 

license issued by the Department of Fish and Game, and to the extent required by 

federal law or regulations, a person holding a license used for recreational purposes. 

This term includes all persons holding a license, certificate, credential, permit, 

registration, or any other authorization to engage in a business, occupation, or 

profession, and the failure to specifically name a particular type of license, certificate, 

credential, permit, registration, or other authorization issued by a board does not exclude 

that person from this term. For licenses issued to an entity that is not an individual 

person, "licensee" includes an individual who is either listed on the license or who 

qualifies for the license. 

(b) The local child support agency shall maintain a list ofthose persons included 

in a case being enforced under Title IV-D of the federal Social Security Act against 

whom a support order or judgment has been rendered by, or registered in, a court of 

this state, and who are not in compliance with that order or judgment. The local child 

support agency shall submit a certified list with the names, social security numbers, 

and last known addresses ofthese persons and the name, address, and telephone number 

of the local child support agency who certified the list to the department. The local 

child support agency shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the persons listed are 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 8 

subject to  an order or judgment for the payment of support and that these persons are 

not in compliance with the order or judgment. The local child support agency shall 

submit to the department an updated certified list on a monthly basis. 

(c) The department shall consolidate the certified lists received from the local 

child support agencies and, within 30 calendar days of receipt, shall provide a copy of 

the consolidated list to  each board that is responsible for the regulation oflicenses, as 

specified in this section. 

(d) On or before November 1, 1992, or as soon thereafter as  economically 

feasible,  as determined by the department, all boards subject to this section shall 

implement procedures to accept and process the list provided by the department, in 

accordance with this section. Notwithstanding any other law, all boards shall collect 

social security numbers or individual taxpayer identification numbers from all applicants 

for the purposes ofmatching the names ofthe certified list provided by the department 

to applicants and licensees and of responding to requests for this infonnation made by 

child support agencies. 

(e) (1) Promptly after receiving the certified consolidated list from the department, 

and prior to the issuance or renewal of a license, each board shall determine whether 

the applicant is on the most recent certified consolidated list provided by the department. 

The board shall have the authority to withhold issuance or renewal ofthe license of an 

applicant on the list. 

(2) If an applicant is on the list, the board shall immediately serve notice as 

specified in subdivision (f) on the applicant of the board's intent to withhold issuance 

or renewal of the license. The notice shall be made personally or by mail to the 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 9 

applicant's last known mailing address on file with the board. Service by mail shall be 

complete in accordance with Section 1013  of the Code of Civil Procedure. 

(A) The board shall issue a temporary license valid for a period of 150 days to 

any applicant whose name is  on the certified list if the applicant is otherwise eligible 

for a license. 

(B) Exeept as provided in subparagraph (D), the The 150-day time period for a 

temporary license shall not be extended. Exeept as proviided in s ubparagraph (D), only 

Only one temporary license shall be issued during a regular license term and it shall 

coincide with the first  150 days of that license term. As this paragraph applies to 

commercial driver's licenses, "license term" shall be deemed to be 12 months from 

the date the application fee is received by the Department of Motor Vehicles. A license 

for the full or remainder of the license term shall be issued or renewed only upon 

compliance with this section. 

(C) In the event that a license or application for a license or the renewal of a 

license is denied pursuant to this section, any funds paid by the applicant or licensee 

shall not be refunded by the board. 

(D) This paragraph shall apply  only  in the ease of a diver's  lieense, other than 

a eommereial driver's license. Upon the request of be  local ehild support agency or 

by  order of the court upon a showing of good cause, the board shall extend a 150-day 

temporary lieense for a period not to exceed 150 extra days. 

(3) (A) The department may, when it is economically feasible for the department 

and the boards to do so as determined by the department, in cases where the department 

is aware that certain child support obligors listed on the certified lists have been out 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  10 

of compliance with a judgment or order for support for more than four months, provide 

a supplemental list of these obligors to each board with which the department has an 

interagency agreement to implement this paragraph. Upon request by the department, 

the licenses of these obligors shall be subject to suspension, provided that the licenses 

would not otherwise be eligible for renewal within six months from the date of the 

request by the department. The board shall have the authority to suspend the license 

of any licensee on this supplemental list. 

(B) If a licensee is on a supplemental list, the board shall immediately serve 

notice as specified in subdivision (f)  on the licensee that his or her license will be 

automatically suspended 150 days after notice is served, unless compliance with this 

section is achieved. The notice shall be made personally or by mail to the licensee's 

last known mailing address on file with the board. Service by mail shall be complete 

in accordance with Section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 

(C) The 150-day notice period shall not be extended. 

(D) In the event that any license is suspended pursuant to this section, any funds 

paid by the licensee shall not be refunded by the board. 

(E) This paragraph shall not apply to licenses subject to annual renewal or annual 

fee. 

(f) Notices shall be developed by each board in accordance with guidelines 

provided by the department and subject to approval by the department. The notice shall 

include the address and telephone number of the local child support agency that 

submitted the name on the certified list, and shall emphasize the necessity ofobtaining 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  11 

a release from that local child support agency as a condition for the issuance, renewal, 

or continued valid status of a license or licenses. 

(1)  In the case of applicants not subject to paragraph (3) of subdivision (e), the 

notice shall infonn the applicant that the board shall issue a temporary license, as 

provided in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) of subdivision ( e ), for 150 calendar 

days if the applicant is otherwise eligible and that upon expiration of that time period 

the license will be denied unless the board has received a release from the local child 

support agency that submitted the name on the certified list. 

(2) In the case oflicensees named on a supplemental list, the notice shall inform 

the licensee that his or her license will continue in its existing status for no more than 

150 calendar days from the date of mailing or service of the notice and thereafter will 

be suspended indefinitely unless, during the 150-day notice period, the board has 

received a release from the local child support agency that submitted the name on the 

certified list. Additionally, the notice shall inform the licensee that any license suspended 

under this section will remain so until the expiration of the remaining license term, 

unless the board receives a release along with applications and fees,  if applicable, to 

reinstate the license during the license term. 

(3) The notice shall also inform the applicant or licensee that if an application 

is denied or a license is suspended pursuant to  this section, any funds paid by the 

applicant or licensee shall not be refunded by the board. The Department of Child 

Support Services shall also develop a form that the applicant shall use to request a 

review by the local child support agency. A copy of this form shall be included with 

every notice sent pursuant to this subdivision. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  12 

(g) (1) Each local child support agency shall maintain review procedures 

consistent with this section to allow an applicant to have the underlying arrearage and 

any relevant defenses investigated, to provide an applicant information on the process 

of obtaining a modification of a support order, or to provide an applicant assistance in 

the establishment ofa payment schedule on arrearages ifthe circumstances so warrant. 

(2) It is the intent of the Legislature that a court or local child support agency, 

when determining an appropriate payment schedule for arrearages, base its decision 

on the facts  of the particular case and the priority of payment of child support over 

other debts. The payment schedule shall also recognize that certain expenses may be 

essential to enable an obligor to be employed. Therefore, in reaching its decision, the 

court or the local child support agency shall consider both of these goals in setting a 

payment schedule for arrearages. 

(h) If the applicant wishes to challenge the submission ofhis or her name on the 

certified list, the applicant shall make a timely written request for review to the local 

child support agency who certified the applicant's name. A request for review pursuant 

to this section shall be resolved in the same manner and timeframe provided for 

resolution of a complaint pursuant to Section 17800. The local child support agency 

shall immediately send a release to the appropriate board and the applicant, if any of 

the following conditions are met: 

(1) The applicant is  found to be in compliance or negotiates an agreement with 

the local child support agency for a payment schedule on arrearages or reimbursement. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 13 

(2) The applicant has submitted a request for review, but the local child support 

agency will be unable to complete the review and send notice of its findings to the 

applicant within the time specified in Section 17800. 

(3) The applicant has filed and served a request for judicial review pursuant to 

this section, but a resolution of that review will not be made within 150 days of the 

date of service of notice pursuant to subdivision (f). This paragraph applies only if the 

delay in completing the judicial review process is not the result ofthe applicant's failure 

to act in a reasonable, timely, and diligent manner upon receiving the local child support 

agency's notice of findings. 

(4) The applicant has obtained a judicial finding of compliance as defined in this 

section. 

(i) An applicant is required to act with diligence in responding to notices from 

the board and the local child support agency with the recognition that the temporary 

license will lapse or the license suspension will go into effect after 150 days and that 

the local child support agency and, where appropriate, the court must have time to act 

within that period. An applicant's delay in acting, without good cause, which directly 

results in the inability of the local child support agency to  complete a review of the 

applicant's request or the court to hear the request for judicial review within the 150-day 

period shall not constitute the diligence required under this section which would justify 

the issuance of a release. 

G)  Except as  otherwise provided in this section, the local child support agency 

shall not issue a release ifthe applicant is not in compliance with the judgment or order 

for support. The local child support agency shall notify the applicant in writing that 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  14 

the applicant may, by filing an order to show cause or notice of motion, request any 

or all of the following: 

(1) Judicial review of the local child support agency's decision not to issue a 

release. 

(2) A judicial determination of compliance. 

(3) A modification of the support judgment or order. 

The notice shall also contain the name and address of the court in which the 

applicant shall file the order to show cause or notice of motion and inform the applicant 

that his or her name shall remain on the ce1iified list if the applicant does not timely 

request judicial review. The applicant shall comply with all statutes and rules of court 

regarding orders to show cause and notices of motion. 

This section shall not be deemed to limit an applicant from filing an order to 

show cause or notice of motion to modify a support judgment or order or to fix  a 

payment schedule on arrearages accruing under a support judgment or order or to obtain 

a court finding of compliance with a judgment or order for support. 

(k) The request for judicial review of the local child support agency's decision 

shall state the grounds for which review is requested and judicial review shall be limited 

to those stated grounds. The court shall hold an evidentiary hearing within 20 calendar 

days of the filing of the request for review. Judicial review of the local child support 

agency's decision shall be limited to  a determination of each of the following issues: 

(1) Whether there is a support judgment, order, or payment schedule on arrearages 

or reimbursement. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 15 

(2) Whether the petitioner is the obligor covered by the support judgment or 

order. 

(3) Whether the support obligor is or is not in compliance with the judgment or 

order of support. 

(4) (A) The extent to which the needs of the obligor, taking into account the 

obligor's payment history and the current circumstances of both the obligor and the 

obligee, warrant a conditional release as  described in this subdivision. 

(B) The request for judicial review shall be served by the applicant upon the 

local child support agency that submitted the applicant's name on the certified list 

within seven calendar days of the filing of the petition. The court has the authority to 

uphold the action, unconditionally release the license, or conditionally release the 

license. 

(C) If the judicial review results in a finding by the court that the obligor is in 

compliance with the judgment or order for support, the local child support agency shall 

immediately send a release in accordance with subdivision([) to the appropriate board 

and the applicant. Ifthe judicial review results in a finding by the court that the needs 

ofthe obligor warrant a conditional release, the court shall make findings of fact stating 

the basis for the release and the payment necessary to satisfy the unrestricted issuance 

or renewal of the license without prejudice to a later judicial determination of the 

amount of support arrearages, including interest, and shall specify payment tenns, 

compliance with which are necessary to  allow the release to remain in effect. 

([)  The department shall prescribe release forms for use by local child support 

agencies. When the obligor is in compliance, the local child support agency shall mail 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  16 

to the applicant and the appropriate board a release stating that the applicant is in 

compliance. The receipt of a release shall serve to notify the applicant and the board 

that, for the purposes of this section, the applicant is in compliance with the judgment 

or order for support. Any board that has received a release from the local child support 

agency pursuant to this subdivision shall process the release within five business days 

of its receipt. 

If the local child support agency determines subsequent to the issuance of a 

release that the applicant is once again not in compliance with a judgment or order for 

support, or with the terms of repayment as described in this subdivision, the local child 

support agency may notify the board, the obligor, and the department in a fonnat 

prescribed by the department that the obligor is not in compliance. 

The department may, when it is economically feasible for the department and 

the boards to develop an automated process for complying with this subdivision, notify 

the boards in a manner prescribed by the department, that the obligor is once again not 

in compliance. Upon receipt of this notice, the board shall immediately notify the 

obligor on a form prescribed by the department that the obligor's license will be 

suspended on a specific date, and this date shall be no longer than 30 days from the 

date the fonn is mailed. The obligor shall be further notified that the license will remain 

suspended until a new release is issued in accordance with subdivision (h). Nothing in 

this section shall be deemed to  limit the obligor from seeking judicial review of 

suspension pursuant to the procedures described in subdivision (k). 

(m) The department may enter into interagency agreements with the state agencies 

that have responsibility for the administration of boards necessary to implement this 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  17 

section, to the extent that it is cost effective to implement this section. These agreements 

shall provide for the receipt by the other state agencies and boards of federal funds to 

cover that portion of costs allowable in federal law and regulation and incurred by the 

state agencies and boards in implementing this section. Notwithstanding any other 

provision of law, revenue generated by a board or state agency shall be used to fund 

the nonfederal share of costs incurred pursuant to this section. These agreements shall 

provide that boards shall reimburse the department for the nonfederal share of costs 

incurred by the department in implementing this section. The boards shall reimburse 

the department for the nonfederal share of costs incurred pursuant to this section from 

moneys collected from applicants and licensees. 

(n) Notwithstanding any other law, in order for the boards subject to this section 

to be reimbursed for the costs incurred in administering its provisions, the boards may, 

with the approval of the appropriate department director, levy on all licensees and 

applicants a surcharge on any fee  or fees collected pursuant to law,  or,  alternatively, 

with the approval of the appropriate department director, levy on the applicants or 

licensees named on a certified list or supplemental list, a special fee. 

(o) The process described in subdivision (h) shall constitute the sole 

administrative remedy for contesting the issuance of a temporary license or the denial 

or suspension of a license under this section. The procedures specified in the 

administrative adjudication provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act ( Chapter 

4.5 ( commencing with Section 11400) and Chapter 5 ( commencing with Section 11500) 

of Part 1 of Division 3 ofTitle 2 ofthe Government Code) shall not apply to the denial, 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  18 

suspension, or failure to issue or renew a license or the issuance of a temporary license 

pursuant to this section. 

(p) In furtherance of the public policy of increasing child support enforcement 

and collections, on or before November 1, 1995, the State Department of Social Services 

shall make a report to the Legislature and the Governor based on data collected by the 

boards and the district attorneys in a format prescribed by the State Department of 

Social Services. The report shall contain all of the following: 

(1) The number of delinquent obligors certified by district attorneys under this 

section. 

(2) The number of support obligors who also were applicants or licensees subject 

to this section. 

(3) The number of new licenses and renewals that were delayed, temporary 

licenses issued, and licenses suspended subject to this section and the number of new 

licenses and renewals granted and licenses reinstated following board receipt ofreleases 

as  provided by subdivision (h) by May 1,  1995. 

(4) The costs incurred in the implementation and enforcement of this section. 

(q) Any board receiving an inquiry as  to the licensed status of an applicant or 

licensee who has had a license denied or suspended under this section or has been 

granted a temporary license under this section shall respond only that the license was 

denied or suspended or the temporary license was issued pursuant to this section. 

Information collected pursuant to this section by any state agency, board, or department 

shall be subject to the Information Practices Act of 1977 (Chapter 1 (commencing with 

Section 1798) of Title  1.8 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code). 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 19 

(r) Any rules and regulations issued pursuant to this section by any state agency, 

board, or department may be adopted as emergency regulations in accordance with the 

rulemaking provisions ofthe Administrative Procedure Act ( Chapter 3 .5 ( commencing 

with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code). The 

adoption of these regulations shall be deemed an emergency and necessary for the 

immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, or general welfare. The 

regulations shall become effective immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State. 

(s) The department and boards, as appropriate, shall adopt regulations necessary 

to implement this section. 

(t) The Judicial Council shall develop the forms necessary to implement this 

section, except as provided in subdivisions (f) and([). 

(u) The release or other use of information received by a board pursuant to this 

section, except as authorized by this section, is punishable as a misdemeanor. 

(v) The State Board ofEqualization shall enter into interagency agreements with 

the department and the Franchise Tax Board that will require the department and the 

Franchise Tax Board to maximize the use of information collected by the State Board 

ofEqualization, for child support enforcement purposes, to the extent it is cost effective 

and permitted by the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

(w) (1) The suspension or revocation of any driver's lieense, including  a 

commercial driver's lieense, license under this section shall not subject the licensee to 

vehicle impoundment pursuant to  Section 14602.6 of the Vehicle Code. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 20 

(2) Notwithstanding any other law, the suspension or revocation of any driver's 

license, including  a commercial driver's license, license under this section shall not 

subject the licensee to increased costs for vehicle liability insurance. 

(x) If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or 

circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or 

applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or 

application, and to this end the provisions of this section are severable. 

(y) All rights to administrative and judicial review afforded by this section to an 

applicant shall also be afforded to a licensee. 

SEC.  3.  Section 22308.5 is added to the Financial Code, to read: 

22308.5.  (a) Notwithstanding any other law, no consumer loan shall exceed an 

annual percentage rate of 15 percent. 

(b) For purposes of subdivision (a), "consumer loan" includes, but is not limited 

to, a consumer credit card,  automobile loan, cash advance, payday loan, or consumer 

product financing loan. "Consumer loan" does not include a mortgage. 

SEC. 4.  Section 6254 of the Government Code is amended to read: 

6254.  Except as provided in Sections 6254.7 and 6254.13, this chapter does 

not require the disclosure of any of the following records: 

(a) Preliminary drafts, notes, or interagency or intra-agency memoranda that are 

not retained by the public agency in the ordinary course of business, if the public 

interest in withholding those records clearly outweighs the public interest in disclosure. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 21 

(b) Records pertaining to pending litigation to which the public agency is a party, 

or to claims made pursuant to Division 3.6 (commencing with Section 810), until the 

pending litigation or claim has been finally adjudicated or otherwise settled. 

(c) Personnel, medical, or similar files, the disclosure of which would constitute 

an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. 

(d) Records contained in or related to any of the following: 

(1) Applications filed with any state agency responsible for the regulation or 

supervision of the issuance of securities or of financial institutions, including, but not 

limited to, banks, savings and loan associations, industrial loan companies, credit 

unions, and insurance companies. 

(2) Examination, operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or 

for the use of, any state agency referred to in paragraph (1 ). 

(3) Preliminary drafts, notes, or interagency or intra-agency communications 

prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of, any state agency referred to  in paragraph 

(1). 

(4) Information received in confidence by any state agency referred to in 

paragraph (1). 

(e) Geological and geophysical data, plant production data, and similar 

information relating to utility systems development, or market or crop reports, that are 

obtained in confidence from any person. 

(f) Records of complaints to,  or investigations conducted by, or records of 

intelligence information or security procedures of, the office of the Attorney General 

and the Deparbnent of Justice, the Office ofEmergency Services and any state or local 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 22 

police agency,  or any investigatory or security files compiled by any other state or 

local police agency, or any investigatory or security files  compiled by any other state 

or local agency for correctional, law enforcement, or licensing purposes. However, 

state and local law enforcement agencies shall disclose the names and addresses of 

persons involved in, or witnesses other than confidential informants to, the incident, 

the description of any property involved, the date, time, and location of the incident, 

all diagrams, statements of the parties involved in the incident, the statements of all 

witnesses, other than confidential informants, to the victims of an incident, or an 

authorized representative thereof, an insurance carrier against which a claim has been 

or might be made, and any person suffering bodily injury or property damage or loss, 

as the result ofthe incident caused by arson, burglary, fire, explosion, larceny, robbery, 

carjacking, vandalism, vehicle theft, or a crime as defined by subdivision (b) of Section 

13951, unless the disclosure would endanger the safety of a witness or other person 

involved in the investigation, or unless disclosure would endanger the successful 

completion of the investigation or a related investigation. However, this subdivision 

does not require the disclosure of that portion of those investigative files  that reflects 

the analysis or conclusions of the investigating officer. 

Customer lists provided to a state or local police agency by an alarm or security 

company at the request of the agency shall be construed to be records subject to this 

subdivision. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, state and local law 

enforcement agencies shall make public the following information, except to the extent 

that disclosure ofa particular item ofinformation would endanger the safety of a person 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 23 

involved in an investigation or would endanger the successful completion of the 

investigation or a related investigation: 

(1) The full name and occupation of every individual arrested by the agency, 

except for arrests for Section 23152 or 23153  of the Vehicle Code, the individual's 

physical description description, including date of birth, color of eyes and hair, sex, 

height and weight, the time and date ofarrest, the time and date ofbooking, the location 

of the arrest, the factual circumstances surrounding the arrest, the amount of bail set, 

the time and manner of release or the location where the individual is currently being 

held, and all charges the individual is being held upon, including any outstanding 

warrants from other jurisdictions and parole or probation holds. 

(2) (A)  Subject to the restrictions imposed by Section 841.5 of the Penal Code, 

the time, substance, and location of all complaints or requests for assistance received 

by the agency and the time and nature of the response thereto, including, to the extent 

the information regarding crimes alleged or committed or any other incident investigated 

is recorded, the time, date, and location of occurrence, the time and date of the report, 

the name and age of the victim, the factual circumstances surrounding the crime or 

incident, and a general description of any injuries, property, or weapons involved. The 

name ofa victim of any crime defined by Section 220,261,261.5, 262,264,264.1, 

265,266,266a,266b,266c,266e,266t266j,267,269,273a,273d,273.5,285,286, 

288, 288a, 288.2, 288.3, 288.4, 288.5, 288.7, 289,422.6, 422.7, 422.75, 646.9, or 647.6 

of the Penal Code may be withheld at the victim's request, or at the request of the 

victim's parent or guardian if the victim is a minor. When a person is the victim of 

more than one crime, information disclosing that the person is a victim of a crime 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 24 

defined in any of the sections of the Penal Code set forth in this subdivision may be 

deleted at the request of the victim, or the victim's parent or guardian if the victim is 

a minor, in making the report of the crime, or of any crime or incident accompanying 

the crime, available to the public in compliance with the requirements ofthis paragraph. 

(B) Subject to the restrictions imposed by Section 841.5 of the Penal Code, the 

names and images ofa victim of human trafficking, as defined in Section 236.1  of the 

Penal Code, and of that victim's immediate family, other than a family member who 

is charged with a criminal offense arising from the same incident, may be withheld at 

the victim's request until the investigation or any subsequent prosecution is complete. 

For purposes of this subdivision, "immediate family" shall have the same meaning as 

that provided in paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 422.4 of the Penal Code. 

(3) Subject to the restrictions of Section 841.5 of the Penal Code and this 

subdivision, the current address of every individual arrested by the agency and the 

current address of the victim of a crime, if the requester declares under penalty of 

perjury that the request is made for a scholarly, journalistic, political, or governmental 

purpose, or that the request is made for investigation purposes by a licensed private 

investigator as described in Chapter 11.3 (commencing with Section 7512) ofDivision 

3 of the Business and Professions Code. However, the address of the victim of any 

crime defined by Section 220,236.1, 261,261.5, 262,264,264.1, 265, 266, 266a, 

266b,266c,266e,266~266j,267,269,273a,273d,273.5,285,286,288,288a,288.2, 

288.3, 288.4, 288.5, 288.7, 289,422.6, 422.7, 422.75, 646.9, or 647.6 of the Penal 

Code shall remain confidential. Address infonnation obtained pursuant to this paragraph 

shall not be used directly or indirectly, or furnished to  another, to sell a product or 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 25 

service to  any individual or group of individuals, and the requester shall execute a 

declaration to that effect under penalty ofperjury. This paragraph shall not be construed 

to prohibit or limit a scholarly, journalistic, political, or government use of address 

information obtained pursuant to this paragraph. 

(g) Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to  administer 

a licensing examination, examination for employment, or academic examination, except 

as provided for in Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 99150) of Part 65  of Division 

14 of Title 3 of the Education Code. 

(h) The contents of real estate appraisals or engineering or feasibility estimates 

and evaluations made for or by the state or local agency relative to the acquisition of 

property, or to prospective public supply and construction contracts, until all of the 

property has been acquired or all of the contract agreement obtained. However, the 

law of eminent domain shall not be affected by this provision. 

(i) Information required from any taxpayer in connection with the collection of 

local taxes that is received in confidence and the disclosure of the information to other 

persons would result in unfair competitive disadvantage to the person supplying the 

information. 

(j) Library circulation records kept for the purpose of identifying the borrower 

ofitems available in libraries, and library and museum materials made or acquired and 

presented solely for reference or exhibition purposes. The exemption in this subdivision 

shall not apply to records of fines  imposed on the borrowers. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 26 

(k) Records, the disclosure ofwhich is exempted or prohibited pursuant to federal 

or state law, including, but not limited to, provisions of the Evidence Code relating to 

privilege. 

(l) Correspondence ofand to the Governor or employees ofthe Governor's office 

or in the custody of or maintained by the Governor's Legal Affairs Secretary. However, 

public records shall not be transferred to the  custody of the Governor's Legal Affairs 

Secretary to evade the disclosure provisions of this chapter. 

(m) In the custody of or maintained by the Legislative Counsel, except those 

records in the public database maintained by the Legislative Counsel that are described 

in Section 10248. 

(n) Statements ofpersonal worth or personal financial data required by a licensing 

agency and filed by an applicant with the licensing agency to establish his or her 

personal qualification for the license, certificate, or permit applied for. 

(o) Financial data contained in applications for financing under Division 27 

( commencing with Section 44500) of the Health and Safety Code, if an authorized 

officer of the California Pollution Control Financing Authority determines that 

disclosure of the financial data would be competitively injurious to the applicant and 

the data is required in order to obtain guarantees from the United States Small Business 

Administration. The California Pollution Control Financing Authority shall adopt rules 

for review of individual requests for confidentiality under this section and for making 

available to the public those portions of an application that are subject to disclosure 

under this chapter. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 27 

(p) Records of state agencies related to activities governed by Chapter 10. 3 

( commencing with Section 3512), Chapter 10.5 ( commencing with Section 3525), and 

Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 3560) of Division 4, that reveal a state agency's 

deliberative processes, impressions, evaluations, opinions, recommendations, meeting 

minutes, research, work products, theories, or strategy, or that provide instruction, 

advice, or training to employees who do not have full collective bargaining and 

representation rights under these chapters. This subdivision shall not be construed to 

limit the disclosure duties of a state agency with respect to any other records relating 

to the activities governed by the employee relations acts referred to in this subdivision. 

(q) (1) Records of state agencies related to activities governed by Article 2.6 

(commencing with Section 14081), Article 2.8 (commencing with Section 14087.5), 

and Article 2.91  (commencing with Section 14089) of Chapter 7 of Part 3 of Division 

9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, that reveal the special negotiator's deliberative 

processes, discussions, communications, or any other portion of the negotiations with 

providers of health care services, impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting 

minutes, research, work product, theories, or strategy, or that provide instruction, 

advice, or training to employees. 

(2) Except for the portion of a contract containing the rates ofpayment, contracts 

for inpatient services entered into pursuant to these articles, on or after April  1,  1984, 

shall be open to inspection one year after they are fully executed. If a contract for 

inpatient services that is entered into prior to April  1,  1984, is amended on or after 

April l, 1984, the amendment, except for any portion containing the rates of payment, 

shall be open to inspection one year after it is fully executed. If the California Medical 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 28 

Assistance Commission enters into contracts with health care providers for other than 

inpatient hospital services, those contracts shall be open to inspection one year after 

they are fully executed. 

(3) Three years after a contract or amendment is open to inspection under this 

subdivision, the portion of the contract or amendment containing the rates of payment 

shall be open to inspection. 

(4) Notwithstanding any other law, the entire contract or amendment shall be 

open to inspection by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee and the Legislative 

Analyst's Office. The committee and that office shall maintain the confidentiality of 

the contracts and amendments until the time a contract or amendment is fully open to 

inspection by the public. 

(r) Records ofNative American graves, cemeteries, and sacred places and records 

of Native American places, features,  and objects described in Sections 5097.9 and 

5097 .993  of the Public Resources Code maintained by, or in the possession of, the 

Native American Heritage Commission, another state agency, or a local agency. 

(s) A final accreditation report of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of 

Hospitals that has been transmitted to the State Department of Health Care Services 

pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 1282 of the Health and Safety Code. 

(t) Records of a local hospital district, formed pursuant to Division 23 

( commencing with Section 32000) of the Health and Safety Code, or the records of a 

municipal hospital, fonned pursuant to Article 7 (commencing with Section 37600) 

or Article 8 (commencing with Section 37650) of Chapter 5 of Part 2 of Division 3 of 

Title 4 of this code, that relate to  any contract with an insurer or nonprofit hospital 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 29 

service plan for inpatient or outpatient services for alternative rates pursuant to Section 

10133 of the Insurance Code.  However, the record shall be open to inspection within 

one year after the contract is fully executed. 

(u) (1) Information contained in applications for licenses to carry firearms issued 

pursuant to Section 26150, 26155, 26170, or 26215 of the Penal Code by the sheriff 

of a county or the chief or other head of a municipal police department that indicates 

when or where the applicant is vulnerable to  attack or that concerns the applicant's 

medical or psychological history or that of members of his or her family. 

(2) The home address and telephone number of prosecutors, public defenders, 

peace officers, judges, court commissioners, and magistrates that are set forth in 

applications for licenses to carry firearms issued pursuant to Section 26150, 26155, 

26170, or 26215 of the Penal Code by the sheriff of a county or the chief or other head 

of a municipal police department. 

(3) The home address and telephone number of prosecutors, public defenders, 

peace officers,judges, court commissioners, and magistrates that are set forth in licenses 

to carry firearms  issued pursuant to Section 26150, 26155, 26170, or26215 of the 

Penal Code by the sheriff of a county or the chief or other head of a municipal police 

department. 

(v) (1) Records of the Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board and the State 

Department of Health Care Services related to activities governed by Part 6.3 

(commencing with Section 12695), Part 6.5  (commencing with Section 12700), Part 

6.6 (commencing with Section 12739.5), or Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 

12739.70) ofDivision 2 of the Insurance Code, or Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 30 

15810) or Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 15870) of Part 3.3  of Division 9 of 

the Welfare and Institutions Code, and that reveal any of the following: 

(A) The deliberative processes, discussions, communications, or any other portion 

of the negotiations with entities contracting or seeking to contract with the board or 

the department, entities with which the board or the department is considering a contract, 

or entities with which the board or department is considering or enters into any other 

arrangement under which the board or the department provides, receives, or arranges 

services or reimbursement. 

(B) The impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting minutes, research, 

work product, theories, or strategy ofthe board or its staff or the department or its staff, 

or records that provide instructions, advice, or training to their employees. 

(2) (A) Except for the portion of a contract that contains the rates of payment, 

contracts entered into pursuant to Part 6.3 (commencing with Section 12695), Part 6.5 

(commencing with Section 12700), Part 6.6 (co1mnencing with Section 12739.5), or 

Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 12739.70) of Division 2 ofthe Insurance Code, or 

Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 15810) or Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 

15870) of Part 3.3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, on or after July 

1, 1991, shall be open to inspection one year after their effective dates. 

(B) If a contract that is entered into prior to July 1,  1991, is amended on or after 

July  I, 1991, the amendment, except for any portion containing the rates of payment, 

shall be open to inspection one year after the effective date of the amendment. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 31 

(3) Three years after a contract or amendment is open to inspection pursuant to 

this subdivision, the portion of the contract or amendment containing the rates of 

payment shall be open to inspection. 

(4) Notwithstanding any other law, the entire contract or amendments to a contract 

shall be open to inspection by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee. The committee 

shall maintain the confidentiality of the contracts and amendments thereto, until the 

contracts or amendments to the contracts are open to inspection pursuant to paragraph 

(3). 

(w) (1) Records of the Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board related to 

activities governed by Chapter 8 ( commencing with Section 10700) ofPart 2 ofDivision 

2 of the Insurance Code, and that reveal the deliberative processes, discussions, 

communications, or any other portion of the negotiations with health plans, or the 

impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting minutes, research, work product, 

theories, or strategy ofthe board or its staff, or records that provide instructions, advice, 

or training to  employees. 

(2) Except for the portion of a contract that contains the rates of payment, 

contracts for health coverage entered into pursuant to Chapter 8 ( commencing with 

Section 10700) of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Insurance Code, on or after January 1, 

1993, shall be open to inspection one year after they have been fully executed. 

(3) Notwithstanding any other law, the entire contract or amendments to a contract 

shall be open to inspection by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee. The committee 

shall maintain the confidentiality of the contracts and amendments thereto, until the 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 32 

contracts or amendments to the contracts are open to inspection pursuant to paragraph 

(2). 

(x) Financial data contained in applications for registration, or registration 

renewal, as  a service contractor filed with the Director of Consumer Affairs pursuant 

to Chapter 20 ( commencing with Section 9800) of Division 3 of the Business and 

Professions Code, for the purpose of establishing the service contractor's net worth, 

or financial data regarding the funded accounts held in escrow for service contracts 

held in force in this state by a service contractor. 

(y) (1) Records of the Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board and the State 

Department of Health Care Services related to activities governed by Part 6.2 

(commencing with Section 12693) or Part 6.4 (commencing with Section 12699.50) 

ofDivision 2 of the Insurance Code or Sections 14005.26 and 14005.27 of, or Chapter 

3 (commencing with Section 15850) of Part 3.3  of Division 9 of, the Welfare and 

Institutions Code, if the records reveal any of the following: 

(A) The deliberative processes, discussions, communications, or any other portion 

of the negotiations with entities contracting or seeking to  contract with the board or 

the department, entities with which the board or department is considering a contract, 

or entities with which the board or department is considering or enters into any other 

arrangement under which the board or department provides, receives, or arranges 

services or reimbursement. 

(B) The impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting minutes, research, 

work product, theories, or strategy of the board or its starff or the department or its 

staff, or records that provide instructions, advice, or training to employees. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 33 

(2) (A) Except for the portion of a contract that contains the rates of payment, 

contracts entered into pursuant to Part 6.2 ( commencing with Section 12693) or Part 

6.4 (commencing with Section 12699.50) of Division 2 of the Insurance Code, on or 

after January 1, 1998, or Sections 14005.26 and 14005.27 of, or Chapter 3 (commencing 

with Section 15850) of Part 3.3 of Division 9 of, the Welfare and Institutions Code 

shall be open to inspection one year after their effective dates. 

(B) If a contract entered into pursuant to Part 6.2 ( commencing with Section 

12693) or Part 6.4 ( commencing with Section 12699.50) ofDivision 2 ofthe Insurance 

Code or Sections  14005.26 and 14005.27 of, or Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 

15850) ofPart 3.3 of Division 9 of, the Welfare and Institutions Code, is amended, the 

amendment shall be open to inspection one year after the effective date of the 

amendment. 

(3) Three years after a contract or amendment is open to inspection pursuant to 

this subdivision, the portion of the contract or amendment containing the rates of 

payment shall be open to  inspection. 

(4) Notwithstanding any other law, the entire contract or amendments to a contract 

shall be open to inspection by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee. The committee 

shall maintain the confidentiality of the contracts and amendments thereto until the 

contract or amendments to a contract are open to inspection pursuant to paragraph (2) 

or (3). 

(5) The exemption from disclosure provided pursuant to this subdivision for the 

contracts, deliberative processes, discussions, communications, negotiations, 

impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting minutes, research, work product, 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 34 

theories, or strategy of the board or its staff, or the department or its staff, shall also 

apply to the contracts, deliberative processes, discussions, communications, negotiations, 

impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting minutes, research, work product, 

theories, or strategy of applicants pursuant to  Part 6.4 ( commencing with Section 

12699 .50) ofDivision 2 ofthe Insurance Code or Chapter 3 ( commencing with Section 

15850) of Part 3.3  of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. 

(z) Records obtained pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (f) of Section 

2891.1  of the Public Utilities Code. 

( aa) A document prepared by or for a state or local agency that assesses its 

vulnerability to terrorist attack or other criminal acts intended to disrupt the public 

agency's operations and that is for distribution or consideration in a closed session. 

(ab) Critical infrastructure information, as defined in Section 131(3) of Title 6 

of the United States Code, that is voluntarily submitted to the Office of Emergency 

Services for use by that office, including the identity of the person who or entity that 

voluntarily submitted the information. As used in this subdivision, "voluntarily 

submitted" means submitted in the absence ofthe office exercising any legal authority 

to compel access to or submission ofcritical infrastructure information. This subdivision 

shall not affect the status of information in the possession of any other state or local 

governmental agency. 

(ac) All information provided to the Secretary of State by a person for the purpose 

ofregistration in the Advance Health Care Directive Registry, except that those records 

shall be released at the request of a health care provider, a public guardian, or the 

registrant's legal representative. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 35 

(ad) The following records of the State Compensation Insurance Fund: 

(1) Records related to  claims pursuant to  Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 

3200) of Division 4 of the Labor Code, to the extent that confidential medical 

information or other individually identifiable information would be disclosed. 

(2) Records related to the discussions, communications, or any other portion of 

the negotiations with entities contracting or seeking to contract with the fund, and any 

related deliberations. 

(3) Records related to the impressions, opinions, recommendations, meeting 

minutes of meetings or sessions that are lawfully closed to the public, research, work 

product, theories, or strategy of the fund or its staff, on the development of rates, 

contracting strategy, underwriting, or competitive strategy pursuant to the powers 

granted to the fund in Chapter 4 ( commencing with Section 11770) ofPart 3 ofDivision 

2 of the Insurance Code. 

(4) Records obtained to provide workers' compensation insurance under Chapter 

4 ( commencing with Section 11770) of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Insurance Code, 

including, but not limited to, any medical claims information, policyholder information 

provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be interpreted to prevent an insurance 

agent or broker from obtaining proprietary information or other information authorized 

by law to be obtained by the agent or broker, and information on rates, pricing, and 

claims handling received from brokers. 

(5) (A) Records that are trade secrets pursuant to Section 6276.44, or Article  11 

( commencing with Section 1060) of Chapter 4 of Division 8 of the Evidence Code, 

including without limitation, instructions, advice, or training provided by the State 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 36 

Compensation Insurance Fund to its board members, officers, and employees regarding 

the fund's special investigation unit, internal audit unit, and informational security, 

marketing, rating, pricing, underwriting, claims handling, audits, and collections. 

(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the portions of records containing trade 

secrets shall be available for review by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee, California 

State Auditor's Office, Division ofWorkers' Compensation, and the Department of 

Insurance to  ensure compliance with applicable law. 

(6) (A) Internal audits containing proprietary information and the following 

records that are related to  an internal audit: 

(i) Personal papers and correspondence of any person providing assistance to 

the fund when that person has requested in writing that his or her papers and 

correspondence be kept private and confidential. Those papers and correspondence 

shall become public records if the written request is withdrawn, or upon order of the 

fund. 

(ii) Papers, correspondence, memoranda, or any substantive information 

pertaining to  any audit not completed or an internal audit that contains proprietary 

infonnation. 

(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the portions of records containing 

proprietary information, or any information specified in subparagraph (A)  shall be 

available for review by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee, California State Auditor's 

Office, Division ofWorkers' Compensation, and the Department oflnsurance to ensure 

compliance with applicable law. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 37 

(7) (A) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), contracts entered into pursuant 

to Chapter 4 ( commencing with Section 11770) ofPart 3 ofDivision 2 ofthe Insurance 

Code shall be open to inspection one year after the contract has been fully executed. 

(B) If a contract entered into pursuant to  Chapter 4 ( commencing with Section 

11770) of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Insurance Code is amended, the amendment shall 

be open to inspection one year after the amendment has been fully executed. 

(C) Three years after a contract or amendment is open to inspection pursuant to 

this subdivision, the portion of the contract or amendment containing the rates of 

payment shall be open to inspection. 

(D) Notwithstanding any other law, the entire contract or amendments to a 

contract shall be open to inspection by the Joint Legislative Audit Committee. The 

committee shall maintain the confidentiality of the contracts and amendments thereto 

until the contract or amendments to a contract are open to  inspection pursuant to this 

paragraph. 

(E) This paragraph is not intended to apply to documents related to contracts 

with public entities that are not otherwise expressly confidential as to that public entity. 

(F) For purposes of this paragraph, "fully executed" means the point in time 

when all of the necessary parties to the contract have signed the contract. 

This section does not prevent any agency from opening its records concerning 

the administration of the agency to public inspection, unless disclosure is otherwise 

prohibited by law. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 38 

This section does not prevent any health facility from disclosing to a certified 

bargaining agent relevant financing information pursuant to Section 8 of the National 

Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. Sec.  158). 

SEC.  5.  Section 1024.5.5 is added to the Labor Code, to read: 

1024.5.5.  (a) An employer or prospective employer shall not, for employment 

purposes, use a consumer credit report or background check information that includes 

driving records containing arrest or conviction for driving under the influence. 

(b)  Subdivision ( a)  does not apply if driving is a direct and primary function of 

the employment or the employment falls under the authority and regulation of the 

Department of Transportation. 

SEC.  6.  Section 10752 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is  amended to read: 

10752.  (a) The annual amount of the license fee for any vehicle, other than a 

trailer or semitrailer, as described in subdivision (a) of Section 5014.1  of the Vehicle 

Code or a commercial motor vehicle described in Section 9400.1  of the Vehicle Code, 

or a trailer coach that is required to be moved under pennit as authorized in Section 

35790 of the Vehicle Code, shall be a sum equal to the following percentage of the 

market value of the vehicle as  determined by the department: 

(1) Sixty fivehundredths of 1 pereent on and  after January 1, 2005, and  before 

May  19, 2009. 

(2)  One pereent for initial and  renewal registrations due on and  after May  19, 

2009, but before July 1, 2011. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 39 

(1)Sixty-five hundredths of 1 percent for initial and renewal registrations due 

on and after July 1,  2011. 2011. and before the effective date of the measure adding 

paragraph (2). 

(2) Thirty-two hundredths of 1 percent for initial and renewal registrations due 

on and after the effective date of the measure adding this paragraph. 

(b) The (1)  Before the effective date of the measure adding paragraph (2). the 

annual amount of the license fee  for any commercial vehicle as described in Section 

9400.1  of the Vehicle Code, shall be a sum equal to 0.65 percent of the market value 

of the vehicle as determined by the department. 

(2) On and after the effective date of the measure adding this paragraph. the 

annual amount of the license fee for any commercial vehicle as described in Section 

9400.1  of the Vehicle Code. shall be a sum equal  to 0.32 percent of the market value 

of the vehicle as detennined by the department. 

(c) Notwithstanding Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11001) or any other 

law to the contrary, all revenues (including penalties), less refunds, attributable to that 

portion of the rate imposed pursuant to this section in excess of O.65 pereent the 

applicable rate in subdivisions (a)  and (b) shall be deposited into the General Fund. 

SEC. 7.  Section 10752.1 ofthe Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 

10752.1.  (a) The annual amount of the license fee for a trailer coach which is 

required to be moved under permit as authorized in Section 35790 ofthe Vehicle Code 

shall be a sum equal to the following percentage of the market value of the vehicle as 

determined by the department: 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 40 

(1)  Sixty fivehundreths  of 1 pereent on  and  after January  1, 2005, and  before 

May 19, 2009. 

(2) One pereent for initial and  renew al r egistrations  due on and  after May 19 

2009, but before July  1,  2011. 

(1)Sixty-five hundredths of 1 percent for initial and renewal registrations due 

on and after July I, 2011. 2011, and before the effective date of the measure adding 

paragraph (2). 

(2) Thirty-two hundredths of 1 percent for initial and renewal registrations due 

on and after the effective date of the measure adding this paragraph. 

(b) Notwithstanding Chapter 5 ( commencing with Section 11001) or any other 

law to the contrary, all revenues (including penalties), less refunds, attributable to that 

portion of the rate imposed pursuant to this section in excess of0.65 pereent the 

applicable rate in subdivision (a) shall be deposited in the General Fund. 

SEC. 8.  Section 10753.5 ofthe Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 

10753.5.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this part, the annual amount 

of the license fee for a vehicle that has been assigned a special identification plate or 

plates as  described in Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code shall be tw o dollars ($2).  one 

dollar ($1). 

SEC.  9.  Chapter 9.2 (commencing with Section 19740) is added to Part 10.2 

of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, to read: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 41 

CHAPTER 9.2.  TAX DEBT AMNESTY 

19740.  (a) The Franchise Tax Board shall administer a tax amnesty program 

for taxpayers subject to Part 10 (commencing with Section 17001) and Part 11 

( commencing with Section 23001 ),  as provided in this chapter. 

(b) For purposes of this chapter, "tax liability" means both of the following: 

(1) Any unpaid tax liability that does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars 

($100,000). 

(2) Up to the first one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) of any unpaid tax 

liability that exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). 

197 41.  The tax amnesty program shall be conducted beginning on the effective 

date of the measure adding this chapter, and shall apply to any taxable year ending 

prior to the effective date of the measure adding this chapter. 

19742.  (a) The Franchise Tax Board shall waive all unpaid tax liability and any 

penalties, fines, and fees imposed by this part for each taxable year for which the tax 

amnesty is allowed. 

(b) Fines, state penalties, bail, forfeitures, restitution fines, restitution orders, or 

any other amounts shall not be imposed by a court of the State of California upon a 

person or any other entity because of an unpaid tax liability. 

(c) Beginning on the effective date of the act adding this chapter, interest on 

unpaid tax liability shall not exceed 1 percent. 

(d) No criminal action shall be brought for unpaid tax liability for years for which 

tax amnesty is allowed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 42 

19743.  Notwithstanding any other law, the Franchise Tax Board shall cease all 

repossessions ofpersonal and real property, any levies, attachments, and garnishments, 

and all attempts to  collect any unpaid debt, incurred both before or after the effective 

date of the measure adding this chapter, except pursuant to a restitution order for a 

victim of a crime or for the payment of child support. 

SEC.  10.  Section 1651.5 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

1651.5.  (a) The director may assign or reassign dates for the expiration of 

registration for a vehicle registered pursuant to this code. The director may establish 

a registration year for any vehicle consisting of any period from seven months to  18 

months, inclusive, with subsequent renewals being required at yearly biennial intervals 

thereafter. The director shall  assign an expiration date of the last day of the calendar 

month to all trailers and to  all motor vehicles subject to  additional fees under the 

provisions of Section 9400. Any vehicle being registered on a quarterly basis shall be 

assigned or reassigned an expiration date ofDecember 31  for the registration year. The 

director shall have the authority to exclude from year-round registration any type of 

vehicle that the director deems appropriate for exclusion. 

(b) In order to implement a year-round registration for vehicles registered pursuant 

to the International Registration Plan as described in Article 4 ( commencing with 

Section 8050) of Chapter 4 of Division 3, the director, on or before January 1,  2009, 

shall assign or reassign a date for the expiration of registration of those vehicles 

described in this subdivision and may utilize the applicable practices and procedures 

set forth under subdivision (a) in order to implement this subdivision. 

SEC.  11.  Section 1678 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 43 

1678.  (a) Between January  1, 2004, and  Deeember 31, 2004, inclusive e, the fee 

amounts  set forth in Section 488.385 ef theCode of CivilProcedure, Section 10902 

of theRevenue  and  Taxation  Code, and  Sections 4604, 5014, 5036, 6700.25, 9102.5, 

9250.8, 9250.13, 9252, 9254, 9258, 9261, 9265, 9702, 11515, 11515.2, 14900, 14900.1, 

14901, 14902, 15255.1, 15255.2, 38121, 38225.4, 38225.5, 38232, 38255, 38260, and 

38265, and  subdivision (b) ofSection 9250, of thiscode, shall be the base fee amounts 

charged by  the department. 

(b) On January  1, 2005, and  every  January  1 thereafter, 

the department shall 

adj ust the fees imposed under  the sections listed in subdi vision (a) by  increasing eaeh 

fee in an  amount  equal  to the increase in the Califomia Consumer Priee Index for the 

prior year, as calculated by the Department ofFinance,  withamounts equal to or greater 

thtt11 tifty  een{s  ($0.50) rnunded te the next highest  o,hele dellar. 

(e) Any  inereases te the fees i1npesed under the seetiens listed in sttbdi,isien 

(a) that are enaeted by  legislatien sttbseqtteflt te Jtt11tt!tly  1, 2005, shall be deemed te 

be ehtt11ges te a1e base fee for ptlfj'leses efthe ealeulatien performed pttrsuant te 

subdivisien (b). 

SEC.  12.  Section 1678.5 is added to the Vehicle Code, to read: 

1678.5.  (a) Upon the effective date of the measure adding this section, any fee 

amount charged by the department, specified in this code or in regulation shall be 

reduced by one-half. 

(b) Fee amounts as adjusted by subdivision (a) shall be rounded up or down to 

the nearest whole dollar, with amounts equal or greater than fifty cents ($0.50) being 

rounded up. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 44 

(c) Any subsequent increase in fees or new fees  shall only be effective upon 

passage of a statute approved by the electorate. 

SEC.  13.  Section 1808 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

1808.  (a) Except where a specific provision of law prohibits the disclosure of 

records or information or provides for confidentiality, all records of the department 

relating to the registration of vehicles, other infonnation contained on an application 

for a driver's license, abstracts ofconvictions, and abstracts of accident reports required 

to be sent to the department in Sacramento, except for abstracts of accidents where, in 

the opinion of a reporting officer, another individual was at fault, shall be open to 

public inspection during office hours. All abstracts of accident reports shall be available 

to law enforcement agencies and courts of competent jurisdiction. 

(b) The department shall make available or disclose abstracts of convictions and 

abstracts of accident reports required to be sent to the department in Sacramento, as 

described in subdivision (a), ifthe date ofthe occurrence is not later than the following: 

(1) Ten years for a violation pursuant to Section 23140, 23152, or 23153. 23153. 

except as provided in paragraph (3). 

(2) Seven years for a violation designated as two points pursuant to Section 

12810, except as provided in paragraph (1) or (3) of this subdivision. 

(3) Two years for a first violation of Section 23152 and three years for a second 

violation of Section 23152. 

(:!) Three years for accidents and all other violations. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 45 

(c) The department shall make available or disclose suspensions and revocations 

of the driving privilege while the suspension or revocation is in effect and for three 

years following termination of the action or reinstatement of the privilege, except that 

driver's license suspension actions taken pursuant to Sections 13202.6 and 13202.7, 

Section 17520 of the Family Code, or Section 256 or former Section 11350.6 of the 

Welfare and Institutions Code shall be disclosed only during the actual time period in 

which the suspension is in effect. 

(d) The department shall not make available or disclose a suspension or revocation 

that has been judicially set aside or stayed. 

(e) The department shall not make available or disclose personal information 

about a person unless the disclosure is in compliance with the Driver's Privacy 

Protection Act of 1994 (18 U.S.C.  Sec. 2721  et seq.). However, a disclosure is subject 

to the prohibition in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 12800.5. 

(f) The department shall make available or disclose to the courts and law 

enforcement agencies a conviction of Section 23103, as  specified in Section 23103.5, 

or a conviction of Section 23140, 23152, or 23153, or Section 655  of the Harbors and 

Navigation Code, or paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 192 of the Penal Code 

for a period of 10 years from the date of the offense for the purpose of imposing 

penalties mandated by this code, or by other applicable provisions of California law. 

(g) The department shall make available or disclose to the courts and law 

enforcement agencies a conviction of Section 191.5, or subdivision (a) of Section 192.5 

ofthe Penal Code, punished as a felony, for the purpose ofimposing penalties mandated 

by Section 23550.5, or by other applicable provisions of California law. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 46 

(h) The department shall not disclose a violation of Section 23152 or 23153 to 

any party conducting a preemployment background investigation unless the background 

investigation is  being conducted for employment in a position requiring the operation 

of a motor vehicle. 

(i) The department shall notify a person whenever a violation of Section 23152 

or 23153  is disclosed pursuant to this section. Notification made pursuant to this 

subdivision shall be made in writing and mailed to the address of the person on file 

with the department and shall include the date of the disclosure and the name and 

affiliation of the party that requested the record. 

SEC.  14.  Section 4152.5  of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

4152.5.  Exeept as proYiclecl fur itt sttbclivision (e) ofSeetion 9553, ·,;vhen When 

California registration is required of a vehicle last registered in a foreign jurisdiction, 

an application for registration shall be made to the department within 20 days following 

the date registration became due. The application shall be deemed an original 

application. 

SEC. 15.  Section 4456 ofthe Vehicle Code, as amended by Section 2 ofChapter 

90 of the Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

4456.  (a) When selling a vehicle, dealers and lessor-retailers shall use numbered 

report-of-sale forms issued by the department. The forms shall be used in accordance 

with the following terms and conditions: 

(1) The dealer or lessor-retailer shall attach for display a copy of the report of 

sale on the vehicle before the vehicle is delivered to the purchaser. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 47 

(2) The dealer or lessor-retailer shall submit to the department an application 

accompanied by all fees Md penalties due for registration or transfer of registration of 

the vehicle within 30 days from the date of sale, as pm, ided in sttbdi, isien (e)  ef 

Seetien 9553, sale if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and 20 days if the vehicle is a new 

vehicle. Penalties due for noncompliance with this paragraph shall be paid by the dealer 

or lessor-retailer. The dealer or lessor-retailer shall not charge the purchaser for the 

penalties. 

(3) As part of an application to transfer registration of a used vehicle, the dealer 

or lessor-retailer shall include all of the following information on the certificate oftitle, 

application for a duplicate certificate of title, or form prescribed by the department: 

(A) Date of sale and report-of-sale number. 

(B) Purchaser's name and address. 

(C) Dealer's name, address, number, and signature or signature of authorized 

agent. 

(D) Salesperson number. 

(4) Ifthe department returns an application and the application was first received 

by the department within 30 days of the date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a 

used vehicle, and 20 days if the vehicle is a new vehicle, the dealer or lessor-retailer 

shall submit a corrected application to the department within 50 days from the date of 

sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and 40 days if the vehicle is a new 

vehicle, or within 30 days from the date that the application is first returned by the 

department if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and 20 days if the vehicle is a new vehicle, 

whichever is  later. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 48 

(5) Ifthe department returns an application and the application was first received 

by the department more than 30 days from the date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle 

is a used vehicle, and 20 days ifthe vehicle is a new vehicle, the dealer or lessor-retailer 

shall submit a corrected application to the department within 50 days from the date of 

sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and 40 days if the vehicle is a new 

vehicle. 

(6) An application first received by the department more than 50 days from the 

date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and 40 days if the vehicle is 

a new vehicle, is subject to the penalties specified in subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 

4456.1. 

(7) The dealer or lessor-retailer shall report the sale pursuant to Section 5901. 

(b) (1) A transfer that takes place through a dealer conducting a wholesale vehicle 

auction shall be reported to the department by that dealer on a single form approved 

by the department. The completed form shall contain, at a minimum, all ofthe following 

information: 

(A) The name and address of the seller. 

(B) The seller's dealer number, if applicable. 

(C) The date of delivery to the dealer conducting the auction. 

(D) The actual mileage of the vehicle as indicated by the vehicle's odometer at 

the time of delivery to the dealer conducting the auction. 

(E) The name, address, and occupational license number ofthe dealer conducting 

the auction. 

(F) The name, address, and occupational license number of the buyer. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 49 

(G) The signature of the dealer conducting the auction. 

(2) Submission ofthe completed form specified in paragraph (1) to the department 

shall fully satisfy the requirements of subdivision (a) and subdivision (a) of Section 

5901  with respect to the dealer selling at auction and the dealer conducting the auction. 

(3) The single form required by this subdivision does not relieve a dealer of any 

obligation or responsibility that is required by any other law. 

(c) A vehicle displaying a copy of the report of sale may be operated without 

license plates or registration card until either of the following, whichever occurs first: 

(1) The license plates and registration card are received by the purchaser. 

(2) A 90-day period, commencing with the date ofsale ofthe vehicle, has expired. 

(d) This section shall become operative on July!, 2012. 

(e) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2019, and as of that 

date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2019, 

deletes or extends that date. 

SEC.  16.  Section 4456 of the Vehicle Code, as added by Section 3 of Chapter 

90 of the Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

4456.  (a) When selling a vehicle, dealers and lessor-retailers shall report the 

sale using the reporting system described in Section 4456.2. After providing information 

to the reporting system, the dealer or lessor-retailer shall do  all of the following: 

(1) The dealer or lessor-retailer shall attach for display a copy ofthe report-of-sale 

fonn provided by the reporting system on the vehicle before the vehicle is delivered 

to the purchaser. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 50 

(2) The dealer or lessor-retailer shall submit to the department an application 

accompanied by all fees !ll'td penalties due for registration or transfer of registration of 

the vehicle within 30 days from the date of sale,  M  prn,ided in sttbdi,ision (e) of 

Seetion 9553, sale if the vehicle is a used vehicle,  and within 20 days if the vehicle is 

a new vehicle.  Penalties due for noncompliance with this paragraph shall be paid by 

the dealer or lessor-retailer. The dealer or lessor-retailer shall not charge the purchaser 

for the penalties. 

(3) As part of an application to transfer registration of a used vehicle, the dealer 

or lessor-retailer shall include all ofthe following information on the certificate oftitle, 

application for a duplicate certificate of title, or form prescribed by the department: 

(A) Date of sale and report-of-sale number. 

(B) Purchaser's name and address. 

(C) Dealer's name, address, number, and signature, or signature of authorized 

agent. 

(D) Salesperson number. 

(4) Ifthe department returns an application and the application was first received 

by the department within 30 days of the date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a 

used vehicle, and within 20 days if the vehicle is a new vehicle, the dealer or 

lessor-retailer shall submit a corrected application to the department within 50 days 

from the date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and within 40 days 

if the vehicle is a new vehicle, or within 30 days from the date that the application was 

first returned by the department if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and within 20 days if 

the vehicle is a new vehicle, whichever is later. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 51 

(5) Ifthe department returns an application and the application was first received 

by the department more than 30 days from the date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle 

is a used vehicle, and more than 20 days if the vehicle is a new vehicle, the dealer or 

lessor-retailer shall submit a corrected application to the department within 50 days 

from the date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and within 40 days 

if the vehicle is a new vehicle. 

(6) An application first received by the department more than 50 days from the 

date of sale of the vehicle if the vehicle is a used vehicle, and more than 40 days if the 

vehicle is a new vehicle, is  subject to the penalties specified in subdivisions (a) and 

(b) of Section 4456.1. 

(7) The dealer or lessor-retailer shall report the sale pursuant to Section 5901. 

(8) If the vehicle does not display license plates previously issued by the 

department, the dealer or lessor-retailer shall attach the temporary license plates issued 

by the reporting system. 

(b) (1) A transfer that takes place through a dealer conducting a wholesale vehicle 

auction shall be reported to the deparhnent electronically in a manner approved by the 

department. The report shall contain, at a minimum, all of the following information: 

(A) The name and address of the seller. 

(B) The seller's dealer number, if applicable. 

(C) The date of delivery to the dealer conducting the auction. 

(D) The actual mileage of the vehicle as indicated by the vehicle's odometer at 

the time of delivery to the dealer conducting the auction. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 52 

(E) The name, address, and occupational license number ofthe dealer conducting 

the auction. 

(F) The name, address, and occupational license number of the buyer. 

(G) The signature of the dealer conducting the auction. 

(2) Submission of the electronic report specified in paragraph (1) to the 

department shall fully satisfy the requirements of subdivision (a) and subdivision (a) 

of Section 5901  with respect to the dealer selling at auction and the dealer conducting 

the auction. 

(3) The electronic report required by this subdivision does not relieve a dealer 

of any obligation or responsibility that is required by any other law. 

(c) A vehicle displaying a report-of-sale form or temporary license plate issued 

pursuant to paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) may be operated without license plates 

until either of the following, whichever occurs first: 

(1) The license plates and registration card are received by the purchaser. 

(2) A 90-day period, commencing with the date ofsale ofthe vehicle, has expired. 

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (c), a vehicle may continue to display a 

report-of-sale form  or temporary license plates after 90 days if the owner provides 

proofthat he or she has submitted an application to the department pursuant to Section 

4457 and it has been no more than 14 days since the permanent license plates were 

issued to the owner. A violation of this paragraph is a correctable offense pursuant to 

Section 40303.5. 

(e) This section shall become operative January  1, 2019. 

SEC.  17.  Section 4604 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 53 

4604.  (a) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (d), prior to the expiration 

of the registration of a vehicle, if that registration is not to be renewed prior to its 

expiration, the owner of the vehicle shall file, under penalty of perjury, a certification 

that the vehicle will not be operated, moved, or left standing upon a highway without 

first making an application for registration of the vehicle, including full payment of 

all fees. The certification is valid until the vehicle's registration is renewed pursuant 

to subdivision ( c). 

(b) Eaeh eertiJ:ieatiem filed pttrsttattl: tti sttbcli, isitin (aj shall be aeetimpaniecl by 

a filing fee tif fifteen cltillars ($15). 

(b) The department shall not charge a fee for certification filed pursuant to this 

section. 

(c) (1) An application for renewal of registration, except when accompanied by 

an application for transfer of title to, or an interest in, the vehicle, shall be submitted 

to the department with payment of the required fees for the current registration year 

and without penalty for delinquent payment of fees imposed under this code or under 

Part 5 (commencing with Section 10701) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation 

Code if the department receives the application prior to  or on the date the vehicle is 

first operated, moved, or left standing upon a highway during the current registration 

year and the certification required pursuant to subdivision (a) was timely filed with 

the department. 

(2) If an application for renewal ofregistration is accompanied by an application 

for transfer of title, that application may be made without incurring a penalty for 

delinquent payment of fees not later than 20 days after the date the vehicle is first 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 54 

operated, moved, or left standing on a highway if a certification pursuant to subdivision 

(a) was timely filed with the department. 

(d) A certification is not required to be filed pursuant to subdivision (a) for one 

or more of the following: 

(1) A vehicle on which the registration expires while being held as inventory by 

a dealer or lessor-retailer or while being held pending a lien sale by the keeper of a 

garage or operator of a towing service. 

(2) A vehicle registered pursuant to Article 4 ( commencing with Section 8050) 

of Chapter 4 of Division 3. 

(3) A vehicle described in Section 5004, 5004.5, or 5051, as provided in Section 

4604.2. However, the registered owner may file a certificate ofnonoperation in lieu 

of the certification specified in subdivision (a). 

(4) A vehicle registered pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 9700) 

of Chapter 6 ifthe registered owner has complied with subdivision ( c) of Section 9706. 

(e) Notwithstanding Section 670, for purposes of this section, a "vehicle" is a 

device by which a person or property may be propelled, moved,  or driven upon a 

highway having intact and assembled its major component parts including, but not 

limited to, the frame or chassis, cowl, and floor pan or, in the case of a trailer, the frame 

and wheels or, in the case of a motorcycle, the frame, front fork,  and engine. For 

purposes of this section, "vehicle" does not include a device moved exclusively by 

human power, a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or a motorized 

wheelchair. 

SEC.  18.  Section 4604.5  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 55 

4604.5.  (a)  (1) Ifthe vehiele has m,t been operated, moYed, or  left standing 

ttpon !tfiJ  highwtty  sttbsecttient to the expiration of the  ,ehiele's registration, the 

eertifieation speeified in Seetion 4604 or 4604.2 mtty  be filed after the expiration of 

the registration of a  , ehiele, but not later than 90 days after the expiration date, sttbj eet 

to the ptty ment of the filing fee speeified in Seetion 4604 and the penalty  speeified in 

paragraph (2). 

(2) A penalty  shall be eolleeted on any  eertifieation speeified in Seetion 4604 

or 4604.2 filed later than midnight ofthe date of expiration ofr-egistration. The penalty 

shall be eomputed as pro, ided in Seetions 9406 and 9559 and after ~be registration and 

"eight fees ha, e been eonwined \< ith the lieense fee speeified in Seetion I 0751  ofthe 

Re, eooe and Taxation Code, as folio" s: 

(A) For a delincttieney period of 10 days or less, the penalty  is  10 pereent of the 

(B) For a delincttieney  period of more than 10 days, to and ineltiding 30 days, 

the penalty is 20 pereent of the fee. 

(C) For a delincttieney period of more than 30 days, to  and ineltiding 90 days, 

the penalty  is 60 pereent of the fee. 

(3) This sub di, ision applies to the rene" al of registratior, for vehieles ·.vith 

expiration dates on or before Deeember 31, 2002. 

(b) The eertifieation speeified in Seetions 4604 and 4604.2 may  be filed no more 

than 90 day·s  after the expiration of the registration ofa vehiele if the  ,ehiele has not 

been operated, moved, or left standing ttpon !tfiJ  highway  s t1bsectt1ent to the expiration 

ofthe ,ehiele's registration. A penalty  shall be eolleeted on !tfiJ  eertifieation speeified 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 56 

in Seetien 4604 er 4604.2 filed later than midnight ef the date ef expiratien ef 

registrntien. After 90 days, the  ,ehiele mttst be registered pt11st1ant te Seetien 4601. A 

eertifieatien filed pt1Tst1ant te this stibdivisimt is stibjeet te the payment efthe filing 

fee speeified in Seetien 4604 and the payment ef the penalties speeified in paragraphs 

(1), (2), and (3) efthis sttbdhisien. 

(1) The penalty fur late pay·ment efthe registratien fee pre, ided in Seetien 9250 

is as fulle" s: 

(A) Fer a delineit1eney  peried ef 10 days er less, the penalty  is ten dellms ($10). 

(B) Fer a delineJ:tleney  peried ef mere than 10 days, te and inelt1ding 3 0 days, 

the penalty  is fifteen dellms ($15). 

(C) Fer a delineJ:tleney  peried ef mere than 30 days, te and inelt1ding 90 day·s, 

the penalty  is thirty  dellars ($30). 

(2) The penalty  en the  weight fee and the  , ehiele lieense fee shall be eempt1ted 

after the "eight fee !18  pre, ided in Seetien 9400 er 9400.1  pltts the  , ehiele lieense fee 

speeified in Seetien 10751 efthe Re, ent1e and Tuxatien Cede ha, e beett added tegether 

!18  folle h'S: 

(A) Fer a delineit1eney  peried ef 10 days er less, the penalty  is  10 pereent ef the 

(B) Fer  a delineit1ene:,,  peried exeeeding 10 days, ~e  and inelt1ding 30 days, the 

penalty  is 20 pereent efthe fee. 

(C) Fer a delineit1eney  peried ef mere than 30 days, ~e  and inelt1ding 90 days, 

the penalty  is 60 pereent ef the fee. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 57 

(3) '.Veight fees not reported and not paid v;ithin 20 days, as ret:jt!ired by Seetion 

9406, shall be assessed a penal-ty  on the clifferenee in the weight fee,  as fellows. 

(A) For a delintJ:t1ene:y  period of 10 days or less, the penalty is  10 pereent of the 

(B) For a delint:jt!eney period eieeeeding 10 days, to and inelttding 30 days, the 

penalty  is 20 pereent of ~be  fee. 

(C) Fot a delintJ:tteney  petiod of more than 30 days, to and ineluding 90 days, 

the penaltj is 60 pereent of the fee. 

(e) This seetion shall apply to registration renewals that eiepire on or after January 

1,  2003. 

SEC.  19.  Section 4604.5 is added to the Vehicle Code, to read: 

4604.5.  Ifthe vehicle has not been operated, moved, or left standing upon any 

highway subsequent to the expiration of the vehicle's registration, the certification 

specified in Section 4604 or 4604.2 may be filed after the expiration of the registration 

of a vehicle, but not later than 90 days after the expiration date, subject to the payment 

of the filing fee specified in Section 4604. 

SEC. 20.  Section 4751  of the Vehicle Code is  amended to read: 

4751.  The department may refuse registration or the renewal or transfer of 

registration of a vehicle in any of the following events: 

(a) If the department is not satisfied that the applicant is  entitled thereto under 

this code. 

(b) Ifthe applicant has failed to furnish the department with information required 

in the application or reasonable additional information required by the department. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 58 

(c) Ifthe department determines that the applicant has made or permitted unlawful 

use of any registration certificate, certificate of ownership, or license plates. 

(d) Ifthe vehicle is mechanically unfit or unsafe to be operated or moved on the 

highways. 

(e) Ifthe department determines that a manufacturer or dealer has failed during 

the current or previous year to  comply with the provisions of this code relating to the 

giving of notice to the department of the transfer of a vehicle during the current or 

prev10us year. 

(f) If the department determines that a lien exists, pttrsuant to  Seetion 9800, 

against one m  more other  , ehieles in  "hieh the applieant has an ov1nership interest. 

(f)_ Ifthe applicant has failed to furnish the department with an odometer 

disclosure statement pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 32705 of Title 49 of the 

United States Code. 

SEC. 21.  Section 4760 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4760.  (a) (1) Exeept as pro,ided in subdi>vision (b) or (d), the department shall 

refuse to renew the registration ofa ,ehiele if the registered o .. ner or lessee has been 

mailed a notiee of delincttient parking violation relating to standing or parking, the 

proeessing agency has filed or eleetrnniealey transmitted to the departrnent an itemization 

oftlllpaid parking penalties, ineltiding administrative fees purstiant to Seetion 40220, 

and the o ,vner or lessee has not paid ~be parking penalty  and administrati, e fee purstiant 

to Section 4021 l, tlflless he or she pays to the department, at the time of applieatim, 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 59 

for renuval, the full am:ount of all outstanclittg parking penalties ancl aclministrative 

fees,  113  sho .. n by reeorcls of the clep!tl'ffllent. 

(2) \Vhen the clepartment reeeives the full amount of all outstancling parking 

penalties ancl aclministrative fees pursuant to paragtaph (1), it shall issue a reeeipt 

sho" ing eaeh parking penalty ancl aclministrati, e fee that has been paicl, the proeessing 

ageney for that penalty ancl fee, ancl a cleseription ofthe , ehiele involvecl in the parking 

, iolations. The reeeipt shall also state that, to reclttee the possibility of impottnclntent 

ttncler Seetion 22651  01  immobilization ttncler Seetion 22651.7 of the  , ehiele im oh ecl 

in the parking \ iolation, the registerecl o ,mer or lessee may transmit to that proeessing 

agenej  a eopy or other e, iclenee of the reeeipt. 

(b) The clepartment shall not refuse to rene" the registration of a  , ehiele o ,mecl 

by a renter or lessor if the applieant pro, icles the clepartment "ith the abstraet or notiee 

of clisposition of paiking , iolation issttecl pttrsuant to subclh ision (e) for elearing all 

otttsta11cling parking penalties ancl aclministrati, e fees  113  sho" n bj the 1eeorcls of the 

clepartment. 

(e) The eourt or clesignatecl proeessing agenej  shall issue an abstraet or notiee 

of clisposition of parking  , iolation to the renter or lessor of a  , ehiele issuecl a notiee 

of clelinctttent parking  , iolatio11 relati11g to stancling or parking if the rentet or lessor 

prnvicles the eourt 01  proeessing age11ey  with the naI11e,  aclclress, ancl clriver's liee11se 

11tt1r,ber of the 1e11tee  or lessee at the time of oeeurre11ee of the parki11g  , iolatio11. 

(cl)  The clepartme11t shall 11ot refuse to rene"  the registration of a vehiele if the 

eitatio11  "as issuecl prior to the registerecl O'N11er taki11g possessio11 of the ', ehiele. 

SEC. 22.  Section 4760. l  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 60 

4760 .1.  (a) The department shall, before rene" ing the registration of an,  vehiele, 

eheek the dri.er's lieense reeord of all regislered o,oners for eon,ietion oftraffie 

, iolations and traffie aeeidents. 

(b) The department shall, before renewing the registration of any ·tehiele, eheek 

the driver's lieense reemd ofall registered owners for notiees filed "ith the depat trnent 

pttrsttant to sttbdivision (a) of Seetion 40509 and notiees that the lieensee has fuiled to 

pa,  a la" full)  iffijlosed fine,  penalty, assessment, 01 bail vv ithin the time attthorized 

by  the eottrt for any violation vohieh is tetjttired to be reported pttrsttant to Seetion 1803 

and shall refuse to renev; the registration of the  ,ehiele ifthe driver's license reeord 

of !lfl)>  registered owner has !lfl)>  stteh otttstanding notiees to  appear or fuilttres to pa, 

a eottrt ordered fine, ttnless the departm.ent has reeeived a eerti.!ieate isstted by the 

magistrate or el erk ofthe eottrt hearing the ease in whieh the promise ·was given sho "ing 

that the ease has been adjttdieated or ttnless the registered owner's reeor-d is eleared as 

pro ,ided in Chapter 6 (eommeneing wi~b Section 41500) of Division 17. In liett ofthe 

certificate ofadjttdieation, a notice from the eottrt stating that the original records have 

been lost or destroyed shall permit the departrnm1t to rene" the registration. 

(e) An) notice received bj the department pttrsttant to  Section 40509  .. hieh has 

been on tile .!i ve years ma, be removed frorn the departrne11t records and destroyed, 

in the discretion of the department. 

(d)  In liett of the eerti.!iea{e of adjttdieation m  a notiee from the eottrl, the 

department shall  "ith the eonsenl of all registered o" r,ers eolleet the amo tints  "hieh 

it has been noti.!ied are dtte pttrsttant to Seetions 40509 and 40509.5, and attthorized 

05/21/17  10: 10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 61 

t8 be e8lleeted pursu!tttt t8 i\rtiele 2 (e8mmeneing with 8eeti8n 14910) 8fChapter 5 

8f Di visi8n 6. 

SEC. 23.  Section 4761  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4761.  The department shall inelude en eaeh p8tential registrati8n eard issued 

for ttse at the time 8frene" al,  8r 8n !fil aee8flljlttnying d8eument, !fil itemizati8n 8f 

Ulljlaid parking penalties, ineluding administrative fees,  sh8" ing the ttm8 ttnt there8f 

!tttd thejurisdieti8n vvhieh isstted the n8tiee 8fparking Yi8lati8n 1elating theret8, "hieh 

the registered 891ne1  8l' lessee is req-uired t8 pay pu1suartt t8  8eeti8n 4760. 

SEC. 24.  Section 4762 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4762.  The department shall remit all parking penalties and administrati, e fees 

e8lleeted, after dedtteting the administrative fee attth8rized by  8eeti8n 4763, for eaeh 

n8tiee 8f delinqttent parking vi8lati8n for  ,.hieh parking penalties and administratiYe 

fees ha,e been e81leeted pursuant t8 8eeti8n 4760, t8 eaeh jurisdieti8n in the atn8ttnts 

dtte t8 eaeh j ttrisdieti8n aee81ding t8 its  ttilacljudieated n8tiees 8f delinqttent parking 

, i8lati8tt. \Vithin 45 days frnrr, the time penalties are ree8rded by the department, the 

department shall inform eaeh jttrisdieti8n  v,hieh 8f its n8tiees 8f delinq-uent parking 

1, i8lati8n have been diseharged. 

SEC. 25.  Section 4763  of the Vehicle Code, as  amended by Section 11  of 

Chapter 90 of the Statutes of 2016, is repealed. 

4763. 

(a) The department shall assess a fee for the ree8rding 8f the n8tiee 8f 

delinquent parking Yi8lati8n,  "hieh is gi, en t8 the department by a prneessing agency 

pursttant t8  Seeti8n 40220, in an ttm8ttilt, as  determined by tbe department, that is 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 62 

sufficient te previde a tetal ametmt equal te its actual eests ef administering Seetiens 

4760, 4761, 4762, 4764, and 4765. 

(b) This seetien shall remain in effect enly ttlltil Januar)  1, 2018, and as ef that 

date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before Jam1ary  1, 2018, 

deletes er extends that date. 

SEC. 26.  Section 4763 of the Vehicle Code, as added by Section 12 of Chapter 

90  of the Statutes of 2016, is repealed. 

4763.  (a) The department shall assess a fee for the recording of the notiee of 

delinquent parking vielatien, which is gi, en to the department b) a precessing agency 

pursuant te Seetien 40220, in an amett11t,  as  determined b) the department, that is 

sufficient te pm ,idea total amotmt eqttal to its actual costs of administering Seetiens 

4760, 4761, 4762, 4764, and 4765, and administering the system described in Section 

4456.2. 

(b) This section shall become operati,e January  I, 2018. 

SEC. 27.  Section 4764 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4764.  (a) Ifa vehicle is  transferred er the registration is net renev,ed for tovo 

renewal perieds and the former registered owner or lessee ofthe , ehiele ffwes a parking 

penalty for a notice of delinquent parking , ielation filed "ith the department pursttan-t 

to  Section 40220, the department shall netify  each j ttrisdietion ofthat fact and is not 

requited thereafter te attempt eolleetien of the ttndeposited parking penaltj  and 

administrati, e fees. 

(h) This section does not apply if the transfer of a  , ehiele is ene described in 

Section 6285 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 63 

SEC. 28.  Section 4765 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4765.  Ne exemptien frem the pi:eyment ef itn) fee impesed by  this eede is fttl 

exemptien frem the ebligatien ef a registered ()\vner er lessee te pay  the full anwunt 

efparking penalties fttld  administrative fees pursuant te Seetien 4760. 

SEC. 29.  Section 4766 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4766.  (a) Exeept as prnvided in subdivisiens (b) and (e), the department shall 

refuse te renew the registratien ef a  , ehiele for  whieh a netiee ef neneempliitnee has 

been tritnsmitted te the depar.ment pttrsuitnt te subdi, isien (a) ef Seetien 40002.1  if 

ne eerti.fieate ef adjudieatien has been reeei, eel by  the department pttrsuitnt te 

subdi, isien (b) ef that seetien. The departnrent shall inelude en eaeh petential 

registratien eard issued for use at the time efrenewal, er en fttl aeeelllj'ltttl) ing deeument, 

itn itemizatien ef eitatiens for  "hieh netiees ef neneemplianee hfl', e been reeeived by 

the department pursuant te sttbdi, isien (a) ef Seetien 40002. l. The itemizatien shall 

inelttde the eitatien nttmber, eitatien date, and the j ttrisdietien that isstted the ttftderly ing 

netiee pttrsttant te Seetien 40002 and the aclministrati, e serviee fee for elearing ~be 

effense pursmtt,t te sttbdivisien (b) ef this seetien. 

(b) Open applieatien for rene,.al ef·,ehiele registratien for a  ,ehiele subjeet te 

subdi. isien (a), the department shall net refuse registratien rene" al pursuant te 

subdhisien (a) if the applieant,  with respee', te eaeh eutstanding eerti.fieate ef 

neneetllj'llianee, has performed beth efthe folle,l'ing. 

( 1) Prnvides the department  "ith a eerti.fieate ef adjudieatien for the effense 

issued pursttant te subdi, isien (b) ef Seetien 40002.1. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 64 

(2) Pay·s  l:lfl  administrnfr, e ser, iee fee,  "hieh shall be established by the 

department tti, in the aggregate, defray  its etlsts in administering this seetitln. 

(e) Whenever registration of a  ,ehiele sttbjeet to  sttbdi,ision (a) is trl:lflsferred 

or not renev,ed for h',o rene .. al periods, the department shall notify  eaeh eottrt that 

trl:lflsmitted a notiee of nonemnplil:lflee affeeting the •,ehiele of the trl:lflsfer of, or laek 

ofrene" al of, the registration and the department shall not thereafter refttse registration 

renewal ptttst1ant to  sttbdivision (a). 

SEC. 30.  Section 4767 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4767.  (a) If delin(jtlent parking or toll violations hw, e been reported to the 

department for a  vehiele for v.4tieh a trl:lflsfur of m, nership Md registration has been 

re(jtlested, the department shall not transfer ff'Nttership  and registration t1nless the 

trl:lflsferee reqttesting the transfer pays all ofthe fines Md penalties for those viohttions 

to the depattment, or pro,ides l:lfl  original abstract or 11otice  ofdispositio11 frnm the 

eomt 01  designated processing age11ey  that the fines Md penalties for those  , iolations 

have been eleared with the parking ageney  tlr the eottrt. 

(b) This section only  applies if the trl:lflsfer reqt1ested is one deseribed in Seetio11 

6285 of~1te Re,ent1e Md Taxation Code. 

SEC. 31.  Section 4770 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4770.  (a) Exeept as prn,ided in sttbdi,ision (c)  01  (d), the depattment shall 

refttse to rer,e ..  the registration ofa ,ehiele if~1te registered owner 01  lessee has been 

mailed a notiee eftoll e, asion violation, the proeessing agency has transmitted to the 

department l:lfl  itemization oft111paid toll e,asion penalties, inelttding administrative 

fees, pttrsttant to Seetion 40267, Md the toll evasion penalty and administrati,e fee 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 65 

h!tl> e fieit beefi paid pt1rs tta:ntte, Seetieifl 40266, t1flless the full ame, ttflt e,f all e, tttstaflt!iflg 

te,ll e,asieifl pell:alties a:nt! admiflistrati,e fees,  as  shei.vfl by  reee,rds e,fthe departrfleflt 

are paid te,  the departrflefit at the time e,f applieatie,fl for rrne'1" al. 

(b) The desigflated pmeessiflg agefiey shall isst1e a fieitiee  e,f the t!ispe,sitieifl e,f 

the tell e, asieifl  , ie,latieifl e,r  , ie,latieifls te,  a lesser, if the lesser preivit!es the pmeessiflg 

agefiey  ,,jth the flame, address, aflt! t!rivet's lieefise fittmber e,fthe lessee at the time 

(e) The departrneflt shall refle"  the registratie,fl e,f a ·, ehiele if the appliea:nt 

pm, ides the departrfleflt with the neitiee e,f the t!ispe,sitieifl e,f the te,ll e, asieifl  , ie,latieifl 

e,r  , ie,latieifls isst1ed pmst1afit te, sttbdi, isieifl (b) for eleariflg all eit1tsta:nt!ing tell evasieifl 

penalties and at!miflistrati, e fees, as she," n by  the reemt!s e,f the t!epartrflefit, and the 

applicant has met all either reqttiremeflts for regis~ratiein. 

(ti) The department shall net refuse tcJ  refie"  the registratiein e,f a  , ehiele if the 

tell e, asiein  , ie,latie,fl e,eemied plier te, the date that the registered e, "'ner e,r lessee te,e,k 

pe,ssessie,fl e,f the vehiele. 

SEC. 32.  Section 4771  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4771.  The t!epartrfleflt shall inelttde eJfi eaeh  , ehiele registratieifl refle" al fleitiee 

isstted for t1se at the time eifrefle .. al, e,r 61'1  an aeemnpanyiflg deiet1ment, fill itemizatiein 

eiftlflj:laid tell eiasieifl pel'lalties, iflelttding administrative fees, she,~,ing ~lte  amernnt 

theree,f, thejmist!ietie,n that isstted the neitiee e,fte,ll e,asieifl vieilatiein, a:nd the date e,f 

tell e, asie,n relating theretei, ·,vhieh the registered e, Nner er lessee is reqttired te,  pay 

pt1rst1fillt te,  Seetie,n 4770. 

SEC.  33.  Section 4772 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 66 

4772.  (a) Exeept as prn•tided in subdivisien (b), the departinellt shall remit all 

tell evasiell pellalties !t!ld administrative fees  eelleeted, after dedtteting the 

admillistrative fee atttherized by Seetien 4773, for eaeh lletiee efdelinquent tell evasien 

, ielatien for which tell evasien penalties Md administrative fees have bee!l eelleeted 

pttl'smmt te Seetiell 4770, te each jurisdietien ill the ametmts dtte te each j ttl'isdietien 

aeeerdillg te its ttfladjudieated netiees ef delinquent tell , ielatien. Vlithin 45 days frem 

the time penalties are paid te the depm tment, the department shall inform each 

jttrisdietiell "hieh efits 11etiees ef delinqttent tell e, Mien , ielatien ha·, e been eelleeted. 

(b) This sttbdio isien applies te facilities develeped pttrsuMt te Seetien 143  ef 

the Streets !t!ld High" ay s Cede. Fer each netiee ef delinqtte!lt tell evasien vielatiell 

for v;hieh tell e, Mien pC11alties  and administrati, e fees have been eelleeted by  the 

departmellt pttrsu!t!lt te Seetie!l 4770, each issuing ageney  is dtte !tll ameunt equal te 

the sttm efthe ttnj'Jaid tell, administiati,e fees,  ether eests inettrred by  the issuing 

ageney  that are related te tell e ,asien, prneess ser, ice fees,  !tlld fees !tlld eelleetien 

eests related te eivil debt eelleetien. After dedtteting the department's administrati,e 

fee autherized by  Seetien 4773 and the amem1ts due each issuing ageney  for ttnj'Jaid 

tells, administrati ,e fees, ether eests incurred by  the issuing ageney  that are related te 

tell e,asien, precess ser.iee fees,  alld fees !tlld eelleetien eests related te ei·Al debt 

eelleetien, the depMtment shall depesit ~he bal!tllee efthe tell e,asien penalties eelleeted 

pttl'Stt!tllt te Seetien 4770, if !ti!), in the State Highway Aeeettnt in the State 

'ff!tllspertatien Fttlld. 

SEC. 34.  Section 4773 of the Vehicle Code, as amended by Section 13  of 

Chapter 90 of the Statutes of 2016, is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 67 

4773. 

(a) The depflrtment shall assess a fee for the reeerding efthe netiee ef 

delinqtient tell e,asien  ,ielatien,  .. hieh is gi,en te the depmtment by  a prneessing 

ageney ptlfsuant te Seetien 40267, in an ameunt, l:lS  determined by  the depl:lftment, 

that is suffieient te prnvide a tetal Mneunt equal te at lel:lSt its aetual eests ef 

administering Seetiens 4770, 4771, 4774, l:lfld  4775. 

(b) This seetien shall remain in effeet enly  ttntil Janul:lf)'  1, 2018, and as efthat 

date is repealed, unless a later  ell.aeted statute, that is enaeted before Janul:lf)l  1, 2018, 

deletes er extends that date. 

SEC. 35.  Section 4773 of the Vehicle Code, as added by Section 14 of Chapter 

90 of the Statutes of 2016, is repealed. 

4773. 

(a) The depl:lftment shall assess a fee for the reeerding ef the netiee ef 

delinqt1eflt tell eyasien yielatien,  o,hieh is gi,en te the depmtmeflt by  a prneessing 

agell.eJ  pt1rst1ant te Seetien 40267, ill an Mnettnt, as determined by  the department, 

that is  st1ffieient te pm vide a tetal ametlnt eejttal te at lel:lSt its aetual eests ef 

administering Seetiens 4770, 4771, 4774, and 4775, and administering the system 

deseribed ill Seetien 4456.2. 

(b) This seetien shall beeeme eperntiYe Jl:lfl tll:lf)  1,  2018. 

SEC. 36.  Section 4774 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4774.  (a) Ifa ,ehiele is transferred er the registratien is net renewed for  to1e 

renewal perieds and the former  registered e,oner er  lessee efthe vehiele eo,es a tell 

e, asien penalty fur a netiee efdelinejttenttell e,Mien , ielatien Jiled "ith the department 

pt1rsuant te Seetien 40267, the depl:lftment shall netify  eaeh jurisdietien ef that fuet 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 68 

and is net rectttired thereafter te attempt eelleetien ef the undepesited tell e, asien 

penalty  and adm:inistrati,e fees. 

(b) This seetien <lees  net apply  if the transfei  ef a  , ehiele is ene deseribed in 

Seetien 6285  ef the Re, entte and Tffi<'atien Cede. 

SEC.  37.  Section 4775 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

4775.  Ne exemptien frnm the payment ef any fee  impesed by  this eede is an 

exemptien frem the ebligatien efa registered ewner er lessee te pay  the full ainetmt 

eftell e,asien penalties a!!d administ!ati,e fees pttrsuant te Seetien 4770. 

SEC.  38.  Section 8058 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

8058.  (a) The department shall eharge interest en any  tmdmpaid fees dtte under 

this artiele, at the rate ef I pereent per menth ef the ttnderpaid pertien ef the fees, 

eemmeneing en the date the uttderpaid pertien ef the fees  "ere erigittally  due ai1d 

aeeruittg menthly  tmtil paid. 

(b) Ittterest eharged tt!!dei  s ttbdi, isiett (a) shall eentitttte te aeeumttlate dttrittg 

fill)' disptttatien efthe tmderpaid fees  er fill)' heariflg regaidi!lg the underpaid fees. 

Dttring fill) disputatiett er heari!lg, the registrant may pay  the underpaid fees a!!d efaer 

eharges te aveid additienal iflterest eharges a!ld may· rectttest a refu!td ef aey everpaid 

fees  after fi.nal re, ie ,,. 

(e) Fm fill)  tt!lderpaid fees, the department may  impese a pe!lalty  ef fi.fty  dellars 

($50) er 10 pereent efthe tmderpaid fees,  .. hiehe,er is greater, eemmeneiflg en the 

date the underpaid fees  "ere deterrnitted te be dtte. 

(d) Fer the pttrpeses efthis seetiett, "tmderpaid fees" i!lelttde additieflal  ,ehiele 

registratie!l,  "eight, and liee!lse fees fou!ld te be due te this state. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 69 

(e) The direete,r shall ha,e diseietimi te,  apply sttbdiyisim1 (b) e,f 8eetim1 9562 

instead e,f sttbdi, isie,n (e) e,f this seetie>n. 

(t) The penalt)  strueture set furth in Seetie,ns 9554 and 9554.5 shall apply  in 

plaee e,fthe prnvisie,ns e,fthis seetie,n in the,se eases  where there is a vie,latie,n e,f8eetie,n 

4000, 4000.4, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4004.5, e,r 4156 fur ee,mmereial registratie,n that is 

ne,t appe>rtie,ned pursnant te,  Seetie,n 8050. 

SEC. 39.  Section 9258 of the Vehicle Code is  amended to read: 

9258.  A-(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), a fee offifteen dollars ($15) 

shall be paid to the department for each one-trip permit issued pursuant to Section 

4003. 

(b) The fee authorized in subdivision Ca)  shall be waived for any vehicle which 

has been issued a certificate of nonoperation and is being moved from one location of 

storage to another location of storage. 

SEC. 40.  Section 9400 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

9400.  Except as provided in Section 9400.1, and in addition to any other 

registration fee, there shall be paid the fees set forth in this section for the registration 

of any commercial motor vehicle that operates with unladen weight. \Veight Except 

as  otherwise provided in subdivision (g), fees for pickup trucks are calculated under 

this section. Whenever a camper is temporarily attached to a motor vehicle designed 

to transport property, the motor vehicle shall be subject to the fees imposed by this 

section. The camper shall be deemed to be a load, and fees imposed by this section 

upon the motor vehicle shall be based upon the unladen weight of the motor vehicle, 

exclusive of the camper. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 70 

(a) For any electric vehicle designed, used, or maintained as described in this 

section, fees shall be paid according to the following schedule: 

Unladen Weight 
Less than 6,000  lbs. 
6,000 lbs.  or more but less than  10,000 lbs. 
10,000 lbs.  or more 

..................................................................... . 

Fee 
$  87 
266 
358 

(b) For any motor vehicle having not more than two axles and designed, used, 

or maintained as described in this section, other than an electric vehicle, fees shall be 

paid according to the following schedule: 

Unladen Weight 
Less than  3,000 lbs. 
3,000 lbs.  to  and including  4,000 lbs. 
4,001  lbs.  to  and including  5,000 lbs. 
5,001  lbs.  to  and including  6,000  lbs. 
6,001  lbs.  to  and including  7,000 lbs. 
7,001  lbs.  to  and including  8,000 lbs. 
8,001  lbs.  to  and including  9,000  lbs. 
9,001  lbs.  to  and including  10,000 lbs. 

Fee 
$  8 
24 
80 
154 
204 
257 
308 
360 

(c) For any motor vehicle having three or more axles designed, used, or 

maintained as described in this section, other than an electric vehicle, fees shall be paid 

according to the following schedule: 

Unladen Weight 

2,000  lbs.  to  and including  3,000 lbs. 
3,001  lbs.  to  and including  4,000 lbs. 
4,001  lbs.  to  and including  5,000 lbs. 
5,001  lbs.  to  and including  6,000  lbs. 
6,001  lbs.  to  and including  7,000 lbs. 
7,001  lbs.  to  and including  8,000 lbs. 
8,001  lbs.  to  and including  9,000 lbs. 
9,001  lbs.  to  and including  10,000 lbs. 

Fee 
$  43 
77 
154 
231 
308 
385 
462 
539 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 71 

(d) This section is not applicable to any vehicle that is operated or moved over 

the highway exclusively for the purpose of historical exhibition or other similar 

noncommercial purpose. 

(e) The fee  changes effected by this section apply to (1) initial or original 

registration on or after January 1,  1995, and prior to December 31, 2001, of any 

commercial vehicle never before registered in this state and (2) to renewal ofregistration 

of any commercial vehicle whose registration expires on or after January 1,  1995, and 

prior to December 31, 2001. 

(f) Commercial vehicles, other than those specified in Section 9400.1, with an 

initial registration or renewal ofregistration that is due on or after December 31, 2001, 

are subject to the payment of fees specified in this section. 

(g) This section shall not apply to a pickup truck which is classified as a half-ton, 

three-quarter ton, or one ton pickup truck and which has a towing or hauling capacity 

of 8,500 pounds or less. 

SEC. 41.  Section 9553  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9553.  (a) A penalty shall be added upon any  delinEf:Uent applieation as pro, ided 

in Seetion 9552, exeept as  provided in Seetion 4604 or 9706, or in sttbdivision (b). 

(b) V/hen renmval fee penalties have not aeertted  "ith respeet to  a  , ehiele and 

the  , ehiele is transfened, the transferee has 20 days from the date of the transfer to 

pay ~be registration fees  11hieh beeome due 11ithottt pay men', of penalties or to -!ilea 

eerti-!ieation pursuant to sttbdi,ision (a) of Seetion 4604 if the  ,ehiele will not be 

operated, mo ,ed, or left s~anding upon any  highway dttring the sttbsequent registration 

year, exeept as provided in sttbdivision (e). 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 72 

(e) (1) A dealer or lessor retailer submitting an applieation for registration or 

transfer efa ttsed  ,ehiele shall ha,e 38 days frnm the date efsale te stibmit the fees, 

withetlt the penalty  that other,vise vmttld be reqttircd tlfldcr sttbdivision (a). 

(2) This stibdiv ision does not apply  te penalties dtte er aeemed prier to the date 

of sale by  the dealer er lessor retailer. 

(d) A penalty shall be added if the fees  specified in Section 9255  arc net paid 

99 ithin 28 days after they beeeme delinqttent. 

(e) In additien te the impesitien ef mtmetary  fines or fees  as  specified in this 

seetien, delinqttcnt rcgistratien ma, resttlt in impe ttndment ef the  , ehiele fl ttrsttant te 

Seetion 22651. 

SEC. 42.  Section 9553.5 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9553.5.  (a) \Vhene,er fees ha,c net been paid in foll for an application for 

registratien ef ,ehieles registered pttrsuant to Article 4 (emnmeneing  with  Seetien 

8858) efChaptet 4, the registrant shall httve 28 days frnm the date efnetiee by the 

department te pay  the balance ofthe fees due. 

(b) Failttre te pay  the balance ef the fees due  99 ithin 28 days shall stibjeet the 

applieation te penalties, as defined in Seetiens 9554 and 9554.5, on the tlflj'.laid portion 

of the California fees due. 

SEC. 43.  Section 9553.7 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9553.7.  The penalty fm  delinqttene,  with respect te !:tfi'.Y  transfer is fifteen 

dollars ($15) and applies enly te the last transfer. 

SEC. 44.  Section 9554 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 73 

9554.  (a) (1) A penalty  shall be added on any appliefttion for renewal of 

1egistrfttion made later  than midnight of the dftte of e,;:pirfttion or on or after the dttte 

penalties beeome due. Penalties shall be eomputed as provided in Seetion 9559 and 

shall be collected  " ith the fee. 

(2) Noh,ithstanding paragraph (1), eommeneing on July  1, 2011, a penalty shall 

not be added if an appliefttion for rene" al ofregistrfttion, or an application for rene" al 

ofspeeial license plfttes, is made  "ithin 30 days after midnight of the expiration date 

ofthe registration or special plfttes. This paragraph shall beeome inopertttive on Janttary 

1,  2012. 

(b) The penalty  assessment for the delin(jtlent payment of the registration fee 

specified in Section 9250 shall be as follo~,s: 

(1) Ten dollars ($10) for a delin(jtleney period of 10 days or less. 

(2) Fifteen dollars ($15) for a delinquency period of more than IO  days, to  and 

inelttding 30 days. 

(3) Thirty  dollars ($30) for a delinqtteney  period of more than 30 days, to  and 

including one year. 

(4) Fifty  dollars ($50) for a delin(jtleney period of more than one year, to and 

inelttding two years. 

(5) One httndred dollars ($100) for a delinqtteney period ofmore than two years. 

(e) The penalty  assessmettl for the delinquent payment ofthe "eight foe specified 

in Section 9400 or 9400.1  !111d the  , ehiele license fee  !13  speemed in Section l 0751  of 

the Re, entte and Taxation Code shall be as follo .. ·s: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 74 

(1) Ten pereent ofthe  , ehiele lieense fee, or the eombined !:llflotmt ofthe  , ehiele 

lieense fee and the  ,, eight -fee  if the  , ehiele is sttbj eet to both -fees,  for a delinqtteney 

period of 10 days or less. 

(2) Tv, enty  pereent of the ·, ehiele lieense fee,  or the emnbined ametmt of the 

vehiele lieense fee and the  ,,eight fee  if the  ,ehiele is snbjeet to both fees,  for a 

delinqneney  period of more than 10 days, to and inelttding 30 days. 

(3) Sixty pereent ofthe vehiele lieense fee, or the eombined !:llflottnt ofthe  ,ehiele 

lieense fee and the  ,,eight -fee if the  ,ehiele is sttbjeet to both fees, for a delinqtteney 

period of more than 30 days, to and inelnding one year. 

(4) Eighty pereent of the  , ehiele lieense fee, or the eombined amonnt of the 

vehiele lieense fee  and the  v,eight fee if the  ,ehiele is sttbjeet to both fees, for a 

delinqneney  period of more than one year, to  and inelttding h, o years. 

(5) One httndred sixty pereent ofthe , ehiele lieense fee, or the eombined !:llflO tll1t 

of the  ,ehiele lieense fee and the  ,veight fee if the  ,ehiele is sttbjee~ to both fees, fm 

a delinqttene,  period of more than two years. 

(d) On or after J!tfltlarf 1, 2003, a penalty assessment for\, eight fees not reported 

and not paid ,,, ithin 20 days as reqttired by Seetion 9406 shall be ft]'lplied to the 

differenee in the  ,, eight fee  as follows: 

(1) Ten pereent of the fee  for  a delinqtteney  period of 10 days or less. 

(2) T11enty  pereent of the fee  for a delinqneney  period more than 10 days, to 

and inelttding 30 days. 

(3) Sixty  pereent of the fee  for a delinqtteney  period more than 30 days, to  and 

inelttding one year. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 75 

(4) Eighty pereent efthe .fue for a delinqtteney peried mere than ene year, te and 

inelttding t" e ) ears. 

(5) One httndred sixty pereent for a delinqttene,  peried mere than t11e  years. 

(e) A single penalty assessment for the delinqtteflt payment ef the .fues speeined 

in Seetiens 9250.8 and 9250.13 shall be as follews: 

(1) Ten dellars ($10) for a delinqtteney peried ef 10 days er less. 

(2) Fifteen dellars ($15) for a delinqtteney  peried ef mere than 10 d!I) s, te and 

ine!t1ding 3 0 days. 

(3) Thirt)  dellars ($30) for a delinqt1eney  peried efmere than 30 days, te and 

inelttding ene ) ear. 

(4) Fifty dellars ($50) for a delinqtteney peried ef mere than ene ) ear, te and 

inelt1ding t,ve years 

(5) One httndred dellars ($100) for a delinqt1eney peried efmere than t .. e ,ears. 

(6) This sttbdi,isien applies te the re1te,oaJ efregistratien for  ,ehieles  "ith 

expiratien dates en er after December 1, 2008. 

SEC. 45.  Section 9554.1  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9554.1.  The amet111t efarey  penalty  ealettlated pt1Tst1aflt te Sectien 9554 er 

sttbdiYisien (b) ef Seetien 18116 efthe Health and Safety  Cede shall be redt1eed by 

the amet1nt efany effaet implemented pttrsttaflt te Seetien 10754 efthe Re,ent1e and 

Taxatien Cede, er  arey  pertien ef the amet1nt ef that effset. 

SEC. 46.  Section 9554.2 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

9554.2.  Upon the operation of a commercial motor vehicle at a greater gross 

vehicle weight than had been reported to and registered by the department, a new 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 76 

registration application shall be made to the department. The greater declared gross 

vehicle weight fee as required in Section 9400 .1  a:nd !t:t'ry  penalties deHned in this eede 

shall be paid te the department. 9400 .1 

SEC. 47.  Section 9554.5 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9554.5.  (a) On and after January  1, 2003, a penalty  shall be added en a:ny 

applieatien for eriginal registratien made later tha:n midnight ef the date ef eiq,iratien 

er en er afte,  the date penalties beeeme due.  Penalties shall be eemputed as pm, ided 

in Seetien 9559 and shall be eelleeted  ,.ith the fee. 

(b) The penalty assessment for the delinf!Uent payment ef the registratien fee 

speeiHed in Seetien 9250 shall be as follev, s: 

(1) Thirty  dellars ($30) for a delinqueney peried ef ene year er less. 

(2) Fifty  dellars ($50) for a delinqneney  peried ef mere tha:n  ene year, te a:nd 

ineluding tv, e years. 

(3) One htlfldred dellars ($100) for a delinf!Ueney peried efmere than t.ve years. 

(e) The penalty assessment for the delinquent payment efthe "eight fee speeiHed 

in Seetien 9400 er 9400.1  and the  , ehiele lieense fee as speeiHed in Seetien 10751  ef 

the Re, enue and Tffi<'atien Cede shall be as fulle "s: 

(1) Ferty pereent efthe , ehiele lieense fee, er the emnbined arnetlflt efthe vehiele 

lieense fee and the  weight fee if the vehiele is subjeet te beth fees,  for a delinqueney 

peried ef ene year et less. 

(2) Eighty pereent efthe , ehiele lieense fee, er the emnbined arneunt efthe 

vehiele lieense fee and the  "eight fee if the  , ehiele is subj eet te beth fees,  for a 

delinqneney  peried efmere than ene year, te and inelttding tv,e years. 

05/21/17  10: 10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 77 

(3) One httndred sixty pereent ofthe yehiele lieense fee, or the eombined flfi!Ottnt 

of the  ,ehiele lieense fee and the  v,eight fee if the  ,ehiele is sttbjeet to both fees,  for 

a delinf1t!eney  period of more than t .. o years. 

(cl) A single penalty assessment for the delinf1t!ent payment of the fees speeified 

in Seetions 9250.8  and 9250.13 shall be as follows: 

(1) Thirty dollars ($30) for a delinf1t!eney period of one year or less. 

(2) Fift)  dollars ($50) for a delinf1t!eney  period of more th!ltl one year,  to  and 

ineluding hi, o years. 

(3) One hundred dollars ($100) for a delinqtteney period ofmore than two years. 

(4) This subdrefision shall !l)'lply  to !l)'lplieations for an original registration "here 

the date the fee is due is on or after Deeember 1, 2008. 

(e) This seetion shall beeome opernti ,·e January  1, 2009. 

SEC. 48.  Section 9556 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

9556.  Whenever any person or organization authorized by the department under 

Section 4610 receives an application for renewal of registration accompanied by the 

proper fee and endorses a receipt or validates a registration card or potential registration 

card in respect to the application for renewal of registration prior to midnight on the 

date registration expires in any year, the application and payment of fees shall not be 

deemed delinqttent or sttbjeet to  penalty, delinquent. except that the person or 

organization so receiving the application and fees  shall transmit the application and 

fees to the department as promptly as practicable in the immediate course ofbusiness. 

This section shall become operative on March 8,  1976, unless a later enacted 

statute, which is chaptered before March 8,  1976, deletes or extends such date. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 78 

SEC. 49.  Section 9557 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9557.  (a) Ne penalty shall be impesed for  delim:jttent payment efaflj fee 

re(jtlired te be paid under this eede in the e, ent itflj instrUfifent for effeetive pit) ment 

ef stteh fee is plaeed in the United States mail er in any pestal bex maintained by  the 

United States Pesta! Ser.iee 11ith sttffieient identifieatien in an en,elepe ,;ith pestage 

thereen prepaid and addressed te the Department efMeter \'ehieles at Saernmente, e,r 

te ene ef the regnlarly  established braneh effiees ef the department m te itflj pet sen 

m  etgani~atien atttheri~ed by the department ttnder Seetien 4610, prier te the date er 

time the fee beeemes delin(jtlent. 

(b) Aflj  persen se mailing an instrUflfent for payment ef itflj fee may file with 

the dep!t!tment a eertifieate in ·,vriting she11ing eemplianee .. ith the prnvisiens efthis 

seetien. The eertifieate shall be aeeepted by the departtr,ent fl8 prima fiteie e, idenee ef 

weh mailing. 

SEC. 50.  Section 9558 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

9558.  If a check in payment of a fee or penalty is not paid by the bank on which 

it is drawn on its first presentation, the person tendering the check remains liable for 

the payment of the fee,  er fee and penalty, fee as if he or she had not tendered the 

check. The department in its discretion may redeposit a check in payment of the-fee, 

er the fee and penalty, fee not more than once without assessing additional penalties. 

SEC. 51.  Section 9559 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

9559.  In computing any registration or weight fee er penalt)  imposed by this 

code, whether on a proration or otherwise, a fraction of a dollar is disregarded, unless 

it equals or exceeds fifty cents ($0.50), in which case it is treated as one full dollar 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 79 

($1 ).  Computruion of aey penalty shall be made from the fee after the same has been 

eomputed as pi o, ided in this seetion. 

Any fee or penalty in an amount of forty-nine cents ($0.49) or less shall be 

deemed to be one dollar ($1). 

SEC. 52.  Section 9560 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

95 60.  (a) The department shall  "ah e all penalties thru may be clue for !rue 

payment of1egistrruion renev.al fees  on a  ,ehiele for atty pe1iod dtuing  whieh the 

registe1ed owner is deployed to a loeruion outside of the strue. 

(b) (1) For the purposes of this seetion, "deployed" meatts being ordered to 

tempora1y  military  duty during a period ·,.hen a Presidential EJ<eeutive orde1  speeities 

thru ate United Strues is engaged in eombru or homelattd defense attd the registered 

owner is one of the following: 

(A) A member of the aimed forees. 

(B) A member of the aimed forees reser,e 01  ',he Nruional Guard  who has been 

ealled to aeti, e dtltj  or aetive sen iee. 

(2) "Deployed" does not inelude either of the following: 

(A) Temporary dttty for the sole pttrpose oftraining or proeessing. 

(B) A permanent ehattge of struion. 

(e) This seetion does not apply  to a registered owne1  vvho applies fot 1egis~1ation 

renewal more thatt 60 days after termination of his 01  her deployment. 

SEC.  53.  Section 9561  of the Vehicle Code is  repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 80 

9561.  (a) \Vhen fi leg1tl owner or his or her 1tgent repossesses fi vehiele on "hieh 

rene" 1tl  fees  fife  dtte, the depfiftment sh1tll  "1ti, e fiflY  rene" 1tl pen1tlties th1tt fife  dtte 

for lfite p1tyment if the fees  fife  p1tid within 60 days of tttlcing possession. 

(b) Notwithstfiflding fifty other provisions ofthis eode, ~,hen fi repossessed , ehiele 

is sold through fi  dealer eondtteting fi  "holesale motor , ehiele fittetion fiS  pro, ided in 

subdh ision (b) of Seetion 4456 Md Artiele S (eommeneing Vv'ith  Seetion 6100) of 

Ch1tpter  2 ofDi,ision 3, all:)'  pen1tlties thfit ma:y  be dtte fife  vv!ti,ed,  if all reneo,al fees 

thfit fife  due are p1tid not !mer thfifl 60 da:y s after the dme of sale fit the auetion. 

SEC. 54.  Section 9561.5 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

9561.5.  The depfiftment shall  .. ai,e fiflY  pen1tlties th1tt ma:y  be dtte for lfite 

pfiYment of registrfition renevt1tl fees en fi  , ehiele if 1tll ef the folle" ing eriteri1t fife 

(a) The  ,ehiele is sold throttgh a dealer eendtteting fi  .. heles1tle metor vehiele 

fitle~ien as pro,ided in subdi,ision (b) efSeetion 4456 fiftdArtiele 5 (eornmeneing 

·,vith Seetien 6100) efCbapter 2 efDivisien 3. 

(b) Immedimel)  prier te the s1tle  the  ,ehiele  WfiS  registered as fi  le1tsed vehiele. 

(e) Delh er)  ef the vehiele to the de1tler eondtteting the  "heles1tle metor , ehiele 

1tuetien  "as net litter thfifl  25  da:y s 1tfter the terminatien ef the leMe. 

(d) The d1tte  of tertr,infition ef the le1tse  Md the dfite of deli, er) te the fittetion 

is reperted en the appliefition for registrfitien, or applie1ttien for trfillsfet Md registratien, 

in fi  forrnfit ~1tfit is aeeeptttble te the depfiftment. 

SEC. 55.  Section 9562 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 81 

9562.  (a) \Vhen a transferee or ptlfehaser of a  , ehiele applies for tramfer of 

registration, as pro ,ided in Section 5902, and it is determined by  the depmtment that 

registration penalties aeerued prior te the pttrehase ofthe vehicle, and that the transferee 

or pttrehMer ,,as not cognizant of the nonpayment of the fees for registration for the 

ettrrent or prior registration years, the department may  "ai, e the registration penalties 

upon paymeHt of the fees for registration due. 

(b) Other pre, isions of this eode noh, ithstanding, the di1 eetot may, at his 01  her 

diseretion, in,estigate into the eirettmstanees of any  applieation for registration to 

aseertain if penalties had aeerued threttgh no fattlt or inteHt ofthe mvner. If the directer 

determines that the eiretllllstanees jttstify it, he or she may  "ai, e any  penalties ttpon 

payment of the fees for registration then dtte. 

(e) \Vhen a trm1sferee er pttrehaser ofa ,ehiele applies for transfer of registration 

ofa ,eliiele, and it is determir,ed by  the depl:lltment that fees for registration of the 

, ehiele for any  :i em· are  tt11paid and dtte, that the fees beemne dtte pt iot to the trl:lllsfer 

or pttrehase of the ve!Iiele by the trl:lllsferee or pttrehaser and that the trl:lllsferee or 

pttrehaser "as not eognizant of the faet that the fees were ttnpaid and dtte, the 

departraeHt may waive the fees and any' penalty ~hereon ifthe license plate assigned 

to the  , ehiele displays a  , alidating device isstted by  the department Md the  , alidating 

de, iee eontains the :i ear ntt1nbe1  ofthe registration year fot  nhieh the trl:lllsferee or 

pmehaser is reqttesting a  "ah er of fees and penalties. 

(d) Ution the transfer of a  ,ehiele for v, hieh fees for registratiott and any peJiaities 

thereon are ttnpaid and dtte, the fees and penalties are, notw ithstl:lllding the pro, isions 

ofArtiele 6 (eommeneing .. ith Section 9800) of this eliapter, the personal debt of the 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 82 

tntll:sfernr 5fthe , ehiele  "h5 did ntlt pay  the fees and penalties when they  bee!:tfll.e due 

5f aeemed. The fees !:Ill.cl penalties 1nay be e51leeted by  the dep1:11 tment in !:Ill. 1:1pprnp1i!:tte 
eh ii aetitln ifthe department has "ai, ed the fees and penalties pttrstt!:tll.t t5 sttbdivisi5n 

SEC. 56.  Section 9706 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

9706.  (a) Application for partial year registration in conjunction with an 

application for original California registration shall be made by the owner within 20 

days of the date the vehicle first becomes subject to California registration. Any 

application for partial year registration submitted after that 20-day period shall be 

denied registration for a partial year, and the vehicle shall be subject to payment of the 

fees  for the entire registration year.  In addititln t5 the fee  for the registrati5n ) ear, a 

penaltj, as speeified in Seetitln 9554, shall be added t5 the fee for regis~1'atim1. 

(b) Any application to renew registration for a part of the remainder of the 

registration year or for the entire remainder ofthe registration year shall be made prior 

to midnight ofthe expiration date ofthe last issued registration certificate. Application 

shall be made upon presentation of the last issued registration card or of a potential 

registration issued by the department for use at the time ofrenewal and by payment of 

the required partial year fees, or, ifrenewal is for the remainder ofthe registration year, 

by payment ofthe amrnal fee required by Section 9400 or 9400.1, as reduced pursuant 

to Section 9407. 

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, an owner who registers a vehicle 

pursuant to this article during a calendar year shall, if the vehicle was not operated, 

moved, or left standing upon a highway, file  a certificate of nonoperation prior to the 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 83 

date of the first operation of the vehicle on the highways in a manner which requires 

that registration and shall, by December 31  of each calendar year thereafter, file a 

certification pursuant to  subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 4604 when the vehicle is 

not registered for operation on the highways for the succeeding calendar year. 

(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (c), the owner of any vehicle being moved or 

operated for the purpose of providing support to firefighting operations while the 

vehicle or owner is under contract to the United States Forestry Service, the United 

States Department of the Interior, the Bureau of Land Management, the Department 

ofForestry and Fire Protection, or the Office ofEmergency Services may obtain partial 

year registration if application is made within 20 days of the date the vehicle is first 

operated, moved, or left standing on the highway and the owner has obtained a letter 

of authorization from the department prior to the date that the vehicle is first operated, 

move.d,  or left standing on the highway. 

SEC. 57.  Section 11508 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

11508.  (a) Every occupational license and special plate issued under this chapter 

shall be valid for a period of one year from midnight of the last day of the month of 

issuance. Renewal of the occupational license and special plates for the ensuing year 

may be obtained by the person to whom any plates and license were issued upon 

application to the department and payment of the fee provided in this code. 

(b) Except as provided in subdivision ( c ), every application for the renewal of 

an occupational license and special plates which expire pursuant to this section shall 

be made by the person to whom issued not more than 90 days prior to the expiration 

date, and shall be made by presenting the completed application form provided by the 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 84 

department and by payment ofthe full annual renewal fee for the occupational license 

and special plates. 

(c) If the application for renewal of the occupational license and special plates 

is not made by midnight of the expiration date, the application may be made within 30 

days following expiration ofthe license by paying the annual renewal fee ttt1:d a penalty 

fee etJ:ttal te the ammmt efthe eriginal applieatien fee fur  eaeh eeettpatienal lieense 

held. A penalty  as speei:fied in Seetiens 9553  ttt1:d  9554 shall alse be added te eaeh 

speeial plate renewed dttring the 30  day  peried folle'"ing eJ<piratien efthe speeial 

plates. fee. 

(d) In no event may the licensee renew the occupational license or special plates 

after the expiration of the 30-day period authorized in subdivision (c). 

SEC. 58.  Section 11717 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

11 71 7.  (a) Every occupational license and special plate issued under this article 

shall be valid for a period of one year from midnight of the last day of the month of 

issuance. Except as provided in subdivision ( c ), renewal of the occupational license 

and special plates for the ensuing year may be obtained by the person to whom the 

occupational license and special plates were issued upon application to the department 

and payment of the fee provided in this code. 

(b) Every application for the renewal of an occupational license and special 

plates which expire pursuant to this section shall be made by the person to whom issued 

not more than 90 days prior to the expiration date, and shall be made by presenting the 

completed application fonn provided by the department and by payment of the full 

annual renewal fee  for the occupational license and special plates. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 85 

(c) If the application for renewal of the occupational license and special plates 

is not made by midnight of the expiration date, the application may be made within 30 

days following expiration ofthe license by paying the annual renewal fee and a penalt; 

fee equal to the amottflt of the original applieation fee  fur eaeh oeettpational lieense 

held. A penaley  as speeitied in Seetions 9553  and 9554 shall also be added to eaeh 

speeial plate rene,.ed dttring the 30  day period fullowing expiration ofthe speeial 

plates. fee. 

(d) In no event may the licensee renew the occupational license or special plates 

after the expiration of the 30-day period authorized in subdivision ( c ). 

SEC.  59.  Section 12808.1  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

12808.1.  The deparhnent shall refuse to isstte or renevv' all)  lieense if the 

arplieant has been mailed a notiec of delinqttent parking violation relating to staflding 

of parking, the proeessiflg agefle)  has tiled or eleetrnnieally  transmitted to the 

departrnent an itemizatiofl of ttllpaid parking pemt!ties, inelttdiflg administrative fees 

pmsuant to Section 40220, and the arplieant has not paid the parking penalty and 

administrati, e fee pursttant to  Seetion 402 ! 1,  ttflless he of she pays to the department, 

at the time of application, the full amottnt of all outstanding parkiflg penalties and 

administrati,e fees,  as  sho .. n by records ofthe department. 

SEC.  60.  Section 13352 of the Vehicle Code, as amended by Section 4 of 

Chapter 783  of the  Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

13352.  (a) The department shall immediately suspend or revoke the privilege 

of a person to operate a motor vehicle upon the receipt of an abstract of the record of 

a court showing that the person has been convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 86 

23153, subdivision (a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, or upon the receipt of a 

report of a judge of the juvenile court, a juvenile traffic hearing officer, or a referee of 

a juvenile court showing that the person has been found to have committed a violation 

of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision (a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1. If 

an offense specified in this section occurs in a vehicle defined in Section 15210, the 

suspension or revocation specified in this subdivision also applies to the noncommercial 

driving privilege. The commercial driving privilege shall be disqualified as  specified 

in Sections 15300 to 15302, inclusive. For the purposes of this section, suspension or 

revocation shall be as follows: 

(1) Except as required under Section 13352.1  or 13352.4, upon a conviction or 

finding ofa violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23536, the privilege 

shall be suspended for a period of six months. The privilege shall not be reinstated 

until the person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to 

the department of successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 23 53 8 ofthis code. Ifthe court, as authorized under paragraph 

(3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to order a person to enroll in, participate 

in, and complete either program described in subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the 

department shall require that program in lieu of the program described in subdivision 

(b) of Section 23538. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation 

in, and completion of an approved program shall occur subsequent to the date of the 

current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed prior 

to the date of the current violation. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 87 

(2) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of Section 23153 punishable 

under Section 23554, the privilege shall be suspended for a period of one year. The 

privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility 

and gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful completion of a 

driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health 

and Safety Code as  described in subdivision (b) of Section 23556 of this code. If the 

court, as authorized under paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to 

order a person to enroll in, participate in, and complete either program described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the department shall require that program in lieu of 

the program described in Section 23556. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment, 

participation, and completion of an approved program shall occur subsequent to the 

date of the current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities 

completed prior to the date of the current violation. 

(3) Except as provided in Section 13352.5, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23540, the privilege shall be 

suspended for two years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives 

proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 

successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 

23542 of this code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 

and completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 

violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed prior to the 

date of the current violation. The department shall advise the person that he or she may 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 88 

apply to the department for a restriction of the driving privilege if the person meets all 

of the following requirements: 

(A) Completion of 12 months ofthe suspension period, or completion of90 days 

of the suspension period if the underlying conviction did not include the use of drugs 

as defined in Section 312 and the person was found to be only under the influence of 

an alcoholic beverage at the time of the violation. 

(B) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an  IS-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(C) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (B). 

(D) The person submits the "Verifietttion of Installation" form deseribed in 

paragraph (2) ofsttbdi,ision (g) ofSeetion 13386. 

(E) The person agrees ~o  maintain the ftmetioning,  eertified ignition interloek 

de,iee as teqttired tmder  sttbdivision (g) ofSeetion 23575. 

ill) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 89 

.(E). The person pays all reissue fees and any restriction fee required by the 

department. 

.(E) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the costs of 

administration of this paragraph, as determined by the department. 

(ill The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(4) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23560, the privilege shall be 

revoked for a period ofthree years. The privilege may not be reinstated until the person 

gives proof of financial responsibility, and the person gives proof satisfactory to the 

department of successful completion ofa driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in paragraph 

(4) of subdivision (b) of Section 23562 ofthis code. For the purposes ofthis paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that after the completion of 12 months of the revocation period, 

which may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision ( c)  of 

Section 13353.3, he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's license 

if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  90 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) The initial 12 months of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuantto Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as  a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The persen submits the "Veri-!ieatien ef Installatien" furrn deseribed in 

paragraph (2) efsttbdivisien (g) ef Seetien 13386. 

(D) The peisen agrees te maintain the fttnetiening,  ee1ti-!ied ignitien in:terleek 

de, ice as reqttired tlllde1  snbdi, isien (g) ef Seetien 23 575. 

(C)_ The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

ill)_ The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(ID The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(±)  of Section 23575. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 91 

(5) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23546, the privilege shall be 

revoked for a period ofthree years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person 

files proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 

successful completion of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in subdivision 

(b) or (c) of Section 23548 of this code, ifa 30-month program is unavailable in the 

person's county of residence or employment, or, if available in the county of the 

person's residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health aod Safety Code, or a program 

specified in Section 8001  of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's 

license, which may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision ( c) 

of Section 13353.3, if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) Completion of 12 months of the suspension period, or completion of six 

months of the suspension period if the underlying conviction did not include the use 

of drugs as  defined in Section 3 12 and the person was found to be only under the 

influence of an alcoholic beverage at the time of the violation. 

(B) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 92 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code if a 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(C) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to  continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (B). 

(D) The person submits the "Verification ofinstallation" form described in 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 

(E) The person agrees to maintain the functioning, certified ignition interlock 

device as required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 

(F) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as  defined in Section 

16430. 

(G) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 

Section 23546 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

(H) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 93 

(I) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the costs of 

administration of this paragraph, as detennined by the department. 

(J) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(6) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5 or 23566, the privilege 

shall be revoked for a period of five years. The privilege may not be reinstated until 

the person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the 

department of successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code as described in subdivision 

(b) of Section 23568 ofthis code, or if available in the county ofthe person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program specified in Section 8001 

of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 

and completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 

violation. Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed prior to the 

date of the current violation. The department shall advise the person that after 

completion of 12 months of the revocation period, which may include credit for a 

suspension period served under subdivision (c) of Section 13353.3, he or she may 

apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if the person meets all of the 

following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 94 

(i) Completion ofthe initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence 

program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code, if available 

in the county of the person's residence or employment. 

(ii) Completion of the initial  12 months ofan 18-month 

driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health 

and Safety Code, if a 30-month program is unavailable in the person's county of 

residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person submits the "Verification of Installation" form described in 

paragraph (2)  of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device as required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as  defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) An individual convicted ofa violation of Section 23153 punishable under 

Section 23566 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an  18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 95 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(7) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23550 or 23550.5, or of a violation 

of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5, the privilege shall be revoked for 

a period of four years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person files proof 

of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful 

completion of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if a 30-month program is unavailable 

in the person's county ofresidence or employment, or, if available in the county of the 

person's residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program 

specified in Section 8001  of the Penal Code.  For the purposes of this paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in,  and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that after completion of 12 months of the revocation period, which 

may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision ( c)  of Section 

13353.3, he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if the 

person meets all of the following requirements: 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 96 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) The initial 12 months of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, ifa 30-month 

program is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person submits the "Verification of Installation" form described in 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the fimctioning, certified ignition interlock 

device as required under subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 

Section 23550 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

05/21/17  10:10 A:tv. 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 97 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(8) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision (a) of Section 

23109 that is punishable under subdivision ( e)  of that section or Section 23109 .1, the 

privilege shall be suspended for a period of 90 days to six months, if ordered by the 

court. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial 

responsibility, as  defined in Section 16430. 

(9) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision (a) of Section 

23109 that is punishable nnder subdivision (f)  of that section, the privilege shall be 

suspended for a period of six months, if ordered by the court. The privilege shall not 

be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 

Section 16430. 

(b) For the purpose of paragraphs (2) to (9), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the 

finding of the juvenile court judge, the juvenile hearing officer, or the referee of a 

juvenile court of a commission of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision 

(a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, as specified in subdivision (a) ofthis section, 

is a conviction. 

(c) A judge of a juvenile court, juvenile hearing officer, or referee of a juvenile 

court shall immediately report the findings specified in subdivision (a) to the department. 

(d) A conviction of an offense in a state, territory, or possession of the United 

States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or Canada that, 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 98 

if committed in this state, would be a violation of Section 23152, is a conviction of 

Section 23152 for the purposes of this section, and a conviction of an offense that, if 

committed in this state, would be a violation of Section 23153, is a conviction of Section 

23153  for the purposes of this section. The department shall suspend or revoke the 

privilege to operate a motor vehicle pursuant to this section upon receiving notice of 

that conviction. 

(e) For the purposes of the restriction conditions specified in paragraphs (3) to 

(7), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the department shall terminate the restriction imposed 

pursuant to this section and shall suspend or revoke the person's driving privilege upon 

receipt of notification from the driving-under-the-influence program that the person 

has failed to comply with the program requirements. The person's driving privilege 

shall remain suspended or revoked for the remaining period of the original suspension 

or revocation imposed under this section and until all reinstatement requirements 

described in this section are met. 

(f) For the purposes of this section, completion ofa program is the following: 

(I) Satisfactory completion of all program requirements approved pursuant to 

program licensure, as evidenced by a certificate of completion issued, under penalty 

of perjury, by the licensed program. 

(2) Certification, under penalty ofperjury, by the director of a program specified 

in Section 800 l  of the Penal Code, that the person has completed a program specified 

in Section 8001  of the Penal Code. 

(g) The holder ofa commercial driver's license who was operating a commercial 

motor vehicle, as defined in Section 15210, at the time of a violation that resulted in 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 99 

a suspension or revocation of the person's noncommercial driving privilege under this 

section is not eligible for the restricted driver's license authorized under paragraphs 

(3) to (7), inclusive, of subdivision (a). 

(h) The duration ofa driving-under-the-influence program required by this section 

shall not exceed the duration of the program imposed by the sentencing court. 

fil This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2019, and as  of that 

date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2019, 

deletes or extends that date. 

SEC. 61.  Section 13352 of the Vehicle Code, as added by Section 5 of Chapter 

783 of the Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

13352.  (a) The department shall immediately suspend or revoke the privilege 

of a person to  operate a motor vehicle upon the receipt of an abstract of the record of 

a court showing that the person has been convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 

23153, subdivision (a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, or upon the receipt of a 

report of a judge of the juvenile court, a juvenile traffic hearing officer, or a referee of 

a juvenile court showing that the person has been found to have committed a violation 

of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision (a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1. If 

an offense specified in this section occurs in a vehicle defined in Section 15210, the 

suspension or revocation specified in this subdivision applies also to the noncommercial 

driving privilege. The commercial driving privilege shall be disqualified as  specified 

in Sections  15300 to  15302, inclusive. For the purposes of this section, suspension or 

revocation shall be as follows: 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  100 

(1) Except as required under Section 13352.1  or 13352.4, upon a conviction or 

finding of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23536, the privilege 

shall be suspended for a period of six months. The privilege shall not be reinstated 

until the person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to 

the department of successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 23 53 8 ofthis code. Ifthe court, as authorized under paragraph 

(3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to order a person to emoll in, participate 

in, and complete either program described in subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the 

department shall require that program in lieu of the program described in subdivision 

(b) of Section 23538. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation 

in, and completion of an approved program shall occur subsequent to the date of the 

current violation.  Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed prior 

to the date of the current violation. 

(2) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of Section 23153 punishable 

under Section 23554, the privilege shall be suspended for a period of one year. The 

privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility 

and gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful completion of a 

driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health 

and Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 23556 of this code. If the 

court, as authorized under paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to 

order a person to enroll in, participate in, and complete either program described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the department shall require that program in lieu of 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 101 

the program described in Section 23556. For the purposes ofthis paragraph, enrollment 

in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur subsequent to 

the date of the current violation.  Credit shall not be given to  any program activities 

completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall advise the 

person that he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if 

the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proofofenrollment in a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant 

to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as  described in subdivision (b) of 

Section 23556 of this code. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a program described in subdivision (b) of Section 

23542, if the court has ordered the person to enroll in, participate in, and complete 

either program described in that section, in which case the person shall not be required 

to provide the proof described in clause (i). 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person eomplies  "ith Seetion 23575 .3, if applieable. 

(D) The person ag1 ees to maifitain the funetioning,  eertiiied ignition interloek 

de,iee as reqttired ttnder Seetion 23575.3, ifapplieable . 

.cg The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  102 

.(ill The person pays all reissue fees and any restriction fee required by the 

department. 

(ID The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to  cover the reasonable 

costs of administering the requirements of this paragraph, as  determined by the 

department. 

.(E) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(e). 

(3) Except as provided in Section 13352.5, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23540, the privilege shall be 

suspended for two years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives 

proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 

successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 

23542 of this code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 

and completion ofan approved program shall occur subsequent to the date ofthe current 

violation.  Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed prior to the 

date ofthe current violation. The department shall advise the person that he or she may 

apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if the person meets all of the 

following requirements: 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 103 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an  18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to  continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The persen eem:plies  .vith Seetien 23575.3, ifapplieable. 

(D) The persen agrees te maintain the fttnetiening, eertified ignitien interleek 

de,iee as 1eqt1ired tlflder Seetien 23575.3, if applieable. 

(Q The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as  defined in Section 

16430. 

@  The person pays all reissue fees  and any restriction fee required by the 

department. 

(ID The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the reasonable 

costs of administering the requirements of this paragraph, as determined by the 

department. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  104 

.(E) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(e). 

(4) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23560, the privilege shall be 

revoked for a period ofthree years. The privilege may not be reinstated until the person 

gives proof of financial responsibility, and the person gives proof satisfactory to the 

department ofsuccessful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to Section 1183 6 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in paragraph 

(4) of subdivision (b) of Section 23562 ofthis code. For the purposes of this paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that he or she may apply to  the department for a restricted driver's 

license if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code if a 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 105 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to  continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person complies with Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device as required under Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(G) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the reasonable 

costs of administering the requirements of this paragraph, as determined by the 

department. 

(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(e). 

(5) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23546, the privilege shall be 

revoked for a period of three years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person 

files proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 

successful completion ofan IS-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in subdivision 

(b) or (c) of Section 23548 of this code, ifa 30-monthprogram is unavailable in the 

person's county of residence or employment, or, if available in the county of the 

person's residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 106 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program 

specified in Section 8001  of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's 

license if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person complies with Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device as required under Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  107 

(F) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 

Section 23546 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to  cover the reasonable 

costs of administering the requirements of this paragraph, as determined by the 

department. 

(I) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(e). 

(6) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5 or 23566, the privilege 

shall be revoked for a period of five years. The privilege may not be reinstated until 

the person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the 

department ofsuccessful completion ofa driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code as  described in subdivision 

(b) of Section 23568, or if available in the county of the person's residence or 

employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program specified in Section 8001 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  108 

of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 

and completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 

violation. Credit shall not be given to  any program activities completed prior to the 

date ofthe current violation. The department shall advise the person that he or she may 

apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if the person meets all of the 

following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if a 30-month 

program is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to  continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person complies with Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device as required under Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23153 punishable under 

Section 23566 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  I09 

an  18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 1183 6 

of the Health and Safety Code, or,  if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to  cover the reasonable 

costs of administering the requirements of this paragraph, as determined by the 

department. 

(I) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(e). 

(7) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23550 or 23550.5, or ofa violation 

of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5, the privilege shall be revoked for 

a period of four years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person files proof 

of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful 

completion of an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if a 30-month program is unavailable 

in the person's county ofresidence or employment, or, if available in the county of the 

person's residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program 

specified in Section 8001  of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 110 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that he or she may apply to  the department for a restricted driver's 

license if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if a 30-month 

program is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to  continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person complies with Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device as required under Section 23575.3, if applicable. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 

Section 23550 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 111 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the reasonable 

costs of administering the requirements of this paragraph, as determined by the 

department. 

(I) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(e). 

(8) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision (a) of Section 

23109 that is punishable under subdivision ( e)  of that section or Section 23109 .1, the 

privilege shall be suspended for a period of 90 days to six months, if ordered by the 

court. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial 

responsibility,  as defined in Section 16430. 

(9) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision (a) of Section 

23109 that is punishable under subdivision (f) of that section, the privilege shall be 

suspended for a period of six months, if ordered by the court. The privilege shall not 

be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility, as  defined in 

Section 16430. 

(b) For the purpose of paragraphs (2) to  (9), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the 

finding of the juvenile court judge, the juvenile hearing officer, or the referee of a 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 112 

juvenile court of a commission of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision 

(a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, as specified in subdivision (a) ofthis section, 

is a conviction. 

(c) A judge of a juvenile court, juvenile hearing officer, or referee of a juvenile 

court shall immediately report the findings specified in subdivision (a) to the department. 

(d) A conviction of an offense in a state, territory, or possession of the United 

States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,  or Canada that, 

if committed in this state, would be a violation of Section 23152, is a conviction of 

Section 23152 for the purposes of this section, and a conviction of an offense that, if 

committed in this state, would be a violation of Section 23153, is a conviction of Section 

23153 for the purposes of this section. The department shall suspend or revoke the 

privilege to operate a motor vehicle pursuant to this section upon receiving notice of 

that conviction. 

(e) (1) Except as  specified in paragraph (2) or (3), the restriction conditions 

specified in paragraphs (2) to (7), inclusive, of subdivision (a) shall remain in effect 

until all reinstatement requirements are satisfied. 

(2) For the purposes of the restriction conditions specified in paragraphs (2) to 

(7), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the department shall terminate the restriction imposed 

pursuant to this section and shall suspend or revoke the person's driving privilege upon 

receipt of notification from the driving-under-the-influence program that the person 

has failed to  comply with the program requirements. The person's driving privilege 

shall remain suspended or revoked for the remaining period of the original suspension 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 113 

or revocation imposed under this section and until all reinstatement requirements 

described in this section are met. 

(3) The department shall immediately suspend or revoke the privilege to operate 

a motor vehicle of a person who, with respect to  an ignition interlock device installed 

pursuant to  Section 23575.3, attempts to remove, bypass, or tamper with the device, 

has the device removed prior to the termination date ofthe restriction, or fails to comply 

with any requirement for the maintenance or calibration of the device. The privilege 

shall remain suspended or revoked for the remaining period ofthe originating suspension 

or revocation and until all reinstatement requirements in this section are satisfied, 

provided, however, that ifthe person provides proof to the satisfaction ofthe department 

that the person is in compliance with the restriction issued pursuant to this section, the 

department may, in its discretion, restore the privilege to operate a motor vehicle and 

reimpose the remaining term of the restriction. 

(f) Notwithstanding the suspension periods specified in paragraphs (1) to (7), 

inclusive, of subdivision (a) or Section 13352.1, if the person maintains a functioning, 

certified ignition interlock device for the mandatory term required under Section 

23575.3, inclusive of any term credit earned under Section 13353.6, the department 

shall reinstate his or her privilege to operate a motor vehicle at the time the other 

reinstatement requirements are satisfied. 

(g) For the purposes of this section, completion of a program is the following: 

(1)  Satisfactory completion of all program requirements approved pursuant to 

program Iicensure, as evidenced by a certificate of completion issued, under penalty 

of perjury, by the licensed program. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  114 

(2) Certification, under penalty ofperjury, by the director of a program specified 

in Section 8001  of the Penal Code, that the person has completed a program specified 

in Section 8001  of the Penal Code. 

(h) The holder of a commercial driver's license who was operating a commercial 

motor vehicle, as defined in Section 15210, at the time ofa violation that resulted in 

a suspension or revocation of the person's noncommercial driving privilege under this 

section is not eligible for the restricted driver's license authorized under paragraphs 

(3) to (7), inclusive, of subdivision (a). 

(i) The reinstatement of the driving privilege pursuant to this section does not 

abrogate a person's continuing duty to  comply with any restriction imposed pursuant 

to  Section 23575.3. 

(j) The duration ofa driving-under-the-influence program required by this section 

shall not exceed the duration of the program imposed by the sentencing court. 

ill This section shall become operative on January 1, 2019. 

(J).  This section shall remain in effect only until January 1,  2026, and as of that 

date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2026, 

deletes or extends that date. 

SEC. 62.  Section 13352 of the Vehicle Code, as added by Section 6 of Chapter 

783  of the Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

13352.  (a) The depmiment shall immediately suspend or revoke the privilege 

of a person to operate a motor vehicle upon the receipt of an  abstract of the record of 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  115 

a court showing that the person has been convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 

23153, subdivision (a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, or upon the receipt ofa 

report of a judge of the juvenile court, a juvenile traffic hearing officer, or a referee of 

a juvenile court showing that the person has been found to have committed a violation 

of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision (a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1. If 

an offense specified in this section occurs in a vehicle defined in Section 15210, the 

suspension or revocation specified in this subdivision also applies to the noncommercial 

driving privilege. The commercial driving privilege shall be disqualified as  specified 

in Sections 15300 to  15302, inclusive. For the purposes of this section, suspension or 

revocation shall be as follows: 

(1) Except as required under Section 13352.l  or 13352.4, upon a conviction or 

finding of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23536, the privilege 

shall be suspended for a period of six months. The privilege shall not be reinstated 

until the person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to 

the department of successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 2353 8 ofthis code. If the court, as authorized under paragraph 

(3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to order a person to enroll in, participate 

in, and complete either program described in subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the 

department shall require that program in lieu of the program described in subdivision 

(b) of Section 23538. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation 

in, and completion of an approved program shall occur subsequent to the date of the 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 116 

current violation. Credit shall not be given to  any program activities completed prior 

to the date of the current violation. 

(2) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of Section 23153 punishable 

under Section 23554, the privilege shall be suspended for a period of one year. The 

privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility 

and gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful completion of a 

driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health 

and Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 23556 of this code.  If the 

court, as authorized under paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 23646, elects to 

order a person to enroll in, participate in, and complete either program described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 23542, the department shall require that program in lieu of 

the program described in Section 23556. For the purposes ofthis paragraph, enrollment, 

participation, and completion of an approved program shall occur subsequent to the 

date of the current violation. Credit shall not be given to  any program activities 

completed prior to the date of the current violation. 

(3) Except as provided in Section 13352.5, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23540, the privilege shall be 

suspended for two years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives 

proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 

successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code as described in subdivision (b) of Section 

23542 of this code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 

and completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  117 

violation.  Credit shall not be given to any program activities completed prior to the 

date ofthe current violation. The department shall advise the person that he or she may 

apply to the department for a restriction of the driving privilege if the person meets all 

of the following requirements: 

(A) Completion of 12 months ofthe suspension period, or completion of90 days 

of the suspension period if the underlying conviction did not include the use of drugs 

as defined in Section 312 and the person was found to be only under the influence of 

an alcoholic beverage at the time of the violation. 

(B) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county ofresidence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(C) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to  continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (B). 

(D) The person s ttbmits the "Verifieatien oflnstallation" form deseribed in 

paragraph (2) of sttbdi, ision (g) of Section 13386. 

(E) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interloek de, iee as reqttired under 

subdi, ision (g) of Seetion 23575. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  118 

.(ill The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

{ID The person pays all reissue fees  and any restriction fee required by the 

department. 

(E)_ The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the costs of 

administration of this paragraph, as detennined by the department. 

.(ill The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(1)  of Section 23575. 

(4) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23560, the privilege shall be 

revoked for a period ofthree years. The privilege may not be reinstated until the person 

gives proof of financial responsibility, and the person gives proof satisfactory to the 

department of successful completion of a driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as described in paragraph 

(4) of subdivision (b) of Section 23562 ofthis code. For the purposes ofthis paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that after the completion of 12 months of the revocation period, 

which may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision ( c)  of 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 119 

Section 13353.3, he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's license 

if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) The initial 12 months of an  18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) The initial 12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person submits ~be  "Veriflefrtion ofins~alltttion" form deseribed in 

paragraph (2) of sttbdivision (g) of Seetion 13386. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the ignition irrterloek deviee as ref! uired under 

sttbdivision (g) of Seetion 23575. 

©  The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(ill The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 120 

(ID The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(5) Except as  provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23152 punishable under Section 23546, the privilege shall be 

revoked for a period ofthree years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person 

files proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of 

successful completion ofan 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, as  described in subdivision 

(b) or (c) of Section 23548 of this code, ifa 30-month program is unavailable in the 

person's county of residence or employment, or, if available in the county of the 

person's residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to  Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program 

specified in Section 8001  of the Penal Code.  For the purposes of this paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that he or she may apply to  the department for a restricted driver's 

license, which may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision ( c) 

of Section 13353.3, if the person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) Completion of 12 months of the suspension period, or completion of six 

months of the suspension period if the underlying conviction did not include the use 

of drugs as defined in Section 312 and the person was found to be only under the 

influence of an alcoholic beverage at the time of the violation. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  121 

(B) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Proof of enrollment in an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code ifa 30-month program 

is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) Proof of enrollment in a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(C) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (B). 

(D) The person submits the "Verification of Installation" form described in 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 

(E) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as required under 

subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 

(F) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(G) An  individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 

Section 23546 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  122 

(H) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(I) The person pays to the department a fee sufficient to cover the costs of 

administration of this paragraph, as determined by the department. 

(J) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(6) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5 or 23566, the privilege 

shall be revoked for a period of five years. The privilege may not be reinstated until 

the person gives proof of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the 

department of successful completion ofa driving-under-the-influence program licensed 

pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code as described in subdivision 

(b) of Section 23568 ofthis code, or if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program specified in Section 8001 

of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, enrollment in, participation in, 

and completion of an approved program shall be subsequent to the date of the current 

violation. Credit shall not be given to  any program activities completed prior to the 

date of the current violation. The department shall advise the person that after 

completion of 12 months of the revocation period, which may include credit for a 

suspension period served under subdivision (c)  of Section 13353.3, he or she may 

apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if the person meets all of the 

following requirements: 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 123 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) Completion ofthe initial 12 months ofa 30-month driving-under-the-influence 

program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 ofthe Health and Safety Code, if available 

in the county of the person's residence or employment. 

(ii) Completion of the initial  12 months of an 18-month 

driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health 

and Safety Code, if a 30-month program is unavailable in the person's county of 

residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person submits the "Verification ofinstallation" form described in 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as required under 

subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as  defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23153 punishable under 

Section 23566 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 124 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(7) Except as provided in this paragraph, upon a conviction or finding of a 

violation ofSection 23152 punishable under Section 23550 or 23550.5, or of a violation 

of Section 23153 punishable under Section 23550.5, the privilege shall be revoked for 

a period of four years. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person files proof 

of financial responsibility and gives proof satisfactory to the department of successful 

completion ofan 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if a 30-month program is  unavailable 

in the person's county ofresidence or employment, or, if available in the county of the 

person's residence or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, or a program 

specified in Section 8001  of the Penal Code. For the purposes of this paragraph, 

enrollment in, participation in, and completion of an approved program shall occur 

subsequent to the date ofthe current violation. Credit shall not be given to any program 

activities completed prior to the date of the current violation. The department shall 

advise the person that after completion of 12 months of the revocation period, which 

may include credit for a suspension period served under subdivision ( c)  of Section 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  125 

13353.3, he or she may apply to the department for a restricted driver's license if the 

person meets all of the following requirements: 

(A) The person satisfactorily provides, subsequent to the violation date of the 

current underlying conviction, either of the following: 

(i) The initial 12 months of an  18-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if a 30-month 

program is unavailable in the person's county of residence or employment. 

(ii) The initial  12 months of a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program 

licensed pursuant to Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code, if available in the 

county of the person's residence or employment. 

(B) The person agrees, as a condition of the restriction, to continue satisfactory 

participation in the program described in subparagraph (A). 

(C) The person submits the "Verification of Installation" form described in 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of Section 13386. 

(D) The person agrees to maintain the ignition interlock device as required under 

subdivision (g) of Section 23575. 

(E) The person provides proof of financial responsibility, as defined in Section 

16430. 

(F) An individual convicted of a violation of Section 23152 punishable under 

Section 23550 may also, at any time after sentencing, petition the court for referral to 

an 18-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to Section 11836 

of the Health and Safety Code, or, if available in the county of the person's residence 

or employment, a 30-month driving-under-the-influence program licensed pursuant to 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  126 

Section 11836 of the Health and Safety Code. Unless good cause is shown, the court 

shall order the referral. 

(G) The person pays all applicable reinstatement or reissue fees and any restriction 

fee required by the department. 

(H) The restriction shall remain in effect for the period required in subdivision 

(f) of Section 23575. 

(8) Upon a conviction or finding ofa violation of subdivision (a) of Section 

23109 that is punishable under subdivision (e) of that section or Section 23109.1, the 

privilege shall be suspended for a period of90 days to six months, if ordered by the 

court. The privilege shall not be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial 

responsibility, as defined in Section 16430. 

(9) Upon a conviction or finding of a violation of subdivision ( a)  of Section 

23109 that is punishable under subdivision (f)  of that section, the privilege shall be 

suspended for a period of six months, if ordered by the court. The privilege shall not 

be reinstated until the person gives proof of financial responsibility, as defined in 

Section 16430. 

(b) For the purpose of paragraphs (2) to  (9), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the 

finding of the juvenile court judge, the juvenile hearing officer, or the referee of a 

juvenile court of a commission of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153, subdivision 

(a) of Section 23109, or Section 23109.1, as specified in subdivision (a) ofthis section, 

is a conviction. 

(c) A judge of a juvenile court, juvenile hearing officer, or referee of a juvenile 

court shall immediately report the findings specified in subdivision (a) to the department. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 127 

(d) A conviction of an offense in a state, territory, or possession of the United 

States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or Canada that, 

if committed in this state, would be a violation of Section 23152, is a conviction of 

Section 23152 for the purposes of this section, and a conviction of an offense that, if 

committed in this state, would be a violation of Section 23153, is a conviction of Section 

23153 for the purposes of this section. The department shall suspend or revoke the 

privilege to operate a motor vehicle pursuant to this section upon receiving notice of 

that conviction. 

(e) For the purposes of the restriction conditions specified in paragraphs (3) to 

(7), inclusive, of subdivision (a), the department shall tenninate the restriction imposed 

pursuant to this section and shall suspend or revoke the person's driving privilege upon 

receipt of notification from the driving-under-the-influence program that the person 

has failed to  comply with the program requirements. The person's driving privilege 

shall remain suspended or revoked for the remaining period ofthe original suspension 

or revocation imposed under this section and until all reinstatement requirements 

described in this section are met. 

(f) For the purposes of this section, completion ofa program is the following: 

(1) Satisfactory completion of all program requirements approved pursuant to 

program licensure, as evidenced by a certificate of completion issued, under penalty 

of perjury, by the licensed program. 

(2) Certification, under penalty ofperjury, by the director ofa program specified 

in Section 8001  of the Penal Code, that the person has completed a program specified 

in  Section 8001  of the Penal Code. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  128 

(g) The holder of a commercial driver's license who was operating a commercial 

motor vehicle, as defined in Section 15210, at the time ofa violation that resulted in 

a suspension or revocation of the person's noncommercial driving privilege under this 

section is not eligible for the restricted driver's license authorized under paragraphs 

(3) to  (7), inclusive, of subdivision (a). 

(h) The duration of a driving-under-the-influence program required by this section 

shall not exceed the duration of the program imposed by the sentencing court. 

(i) This section shall become operative January I, 2026. 

SEC.  63.  Section 13364 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

133 64.  (aj Noh, ithstanding !!fl) othet pro , ision ofthis eode, a pei·son 's prh ilege 

to operate a motor vehiele shall be stispended upon noti:f:ieation by  a bank or  :f:in!lfleial 

. illstitt!tion that a eheek has been dishonored  .. hen that eheek "as presented to the 

depattment for  either ofthe following reasons: 

(1) In payment of a iine that res11lted &om !!fl ontst!lflding violation pursuant to 

Seetiofl 40508 er a suspeflsiofl pursu!lflt to Seetion 13365. 

(2) In payment ef a fee  or  pet!alty owed bj the person, if the fee er penalty  is 

recttiired by  this eode for the issti!lflee, reissti!lflee, or retum. efthe person's driver's 

lieeflse after stispension, re, eeation, or restrie~ion of the dri, ing pri, ilege. 

(b) The stispeflsiofl shall remaifl ifl effeet until payment of all iines, fees, Md 

pet!alties is made te fae deparlmeflt or to the eotut, as appropriate, and the persotl's 

dri ,iflg reeord does not eofltaifl any t1oti:f:ieation ef a eourt erder isstied pttrsti!lflt to 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  129 

subdivisio11 (a) of Seetio11 42003  or of a  , iolatio11 of sttbdi, isio11  (a)  or (b) of Seetio11 

40508. 

(e) No suspe11sio11 imposed pursttattt to this seetio11 shall beeome dfeetive uHtil 

30 days after the mailing ofa written notiee of the inte11t to sttspend. 

(d) The ·.vritte1111otiee of a sttspension itnposed pursua11t to this seetio11 shall be 

deli, ered by eertified mail. 

(e) If any personal eheek is offered in pay meHt of fines deseribed i11  paragraph 

(1) ofsubdr;isio11 (a) attd is returned fur any reason, the related notiee issued pursuaii.t 

to Seetio11 40509 or 40509.5 shall be restored to the perso11's reeord. 

(f) Not" ithsta11di11g any other pro, isitJn of lavv',  atty liee11se that has been 

suspended pttrsttati.t to  this seetio11 shall immediately  be rei11stated,  attd the fees attd 

penalties  wai,ed, upon the sttbmissio11 ofproofaeeeptable to the department that the 

eheek has bee11 erroneottsly  dishonored by  the batl.k or finatteial instittttion. 

SEC. 64.  Section 21051  of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

21051.  The following sections apply to trolley coaches: 

(a) Sections 1800, 4000, 4001, 4002, 4003, 4006, 4009, 4150, 4151, 4152, 4153, 

4155, 4156, 4158, 4166, 4300 to 4309, inclusive, 4450 to 4454, inclusive, 4457, 4458, 

4459, 4460, 4600 to 4610, inclusive, 4750, 4751, 4850, 4851, 4852, 4853, 5000, 5200 

to  5205, inclusive, 5904, 6052, 8801, 9254, and 40001  with respect to 4000, relating 

to original and renewal of registration. 

(b) Sections 9250, 9265, 9400, 9406, 9407, 9408, 9550, 9552, 9553, 9554, 9800 

to 9808, inclusive,  14901, and 42230 to 42233, inclusive, relating to registration and 

other fees. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 130 

(c) Sections 2800, 10851,  10852, 10853, 20001  to 20009, inclusive, 21052, 

21053, 21054, 21450 to 21457, inclusive, 21461, 21650, 21651, 21658, 21659, 21700, 

21701,21702,21703,21709,21712,21750,21753,21754,21755,21800,21801, 

21802,21806,21950,21951,22106,22107,22108,22109,22350,22351,22352, 

22400, 22450 to 22453, inclusive, 23103, 23104, 23105, 23110, 23152, 23153, 40831, 

42002 with respect to  10852 and 10853, and 42004, relating to traffic laws. 

(d)  Sections 26706, 26707, and 26708, relating to  equipment. 

(e) Sections 17301, 17302, 17303, 21461, 35000, 35100, 35101, 35105, 35106, 

35111, 35550, 35551, 35750, 35751, 35753, 40000.1  to 40000.25, inclusive, 40001, 

40003, and 42031, relating to the size, weight, and loading of vehicles. 

SEC. 65.  Section 21107.8 of the Vehicle Code is  amended to read: 

21107.8.  (a) (1) A city, county, or city and county may, by ordinance or 

resolution, find and declare that there are privately owned and maintained offstreet 

parking facilities as described in the ordinance or resolution within the city, county, 

or city and county that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of 

vehicular parking. Upon enactment by a city, county, or city and county ofthe ordinance 

or resolution, Sections 22350, 23103, and 23109 and the provisions of Division 16.5 

(commencing with Section 38000) shall apply to privately owned and maintained 

off street parking facilities, except as provided in subdivision (b ). 

(2) (A) If a city, county, or city and county enacts an ordinance or resolution 

authorized by paragraph (1 ), the city, county, or city and county may include in that 

ordinance or resolution authorization for the operator of a privately owned and 

maintained offstreet parking facility to regulate unauthorized parking in that facility. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  131 

(B) tiJ-If a city, county, or city and county has exercised its authority pursuant 

to subparagraph (A) and unauthorized parking is regulated in a privately owned and 

maintained offstreet parking facility, the owner or operator ofthat facility shall include 

in a parking fee invoice instructions that describe the manner in which to contest the 

parking fee invoice. 

(ii) If a eity, eounty',  or eity and eounty has exereised its authority pursuant to 

subparagraph (A) and unauthorized pm:king is regulated in a ptivately  ov,ned and 

maintailted offatteet pm:king faeility, the ov,ner or operator of that faeility  shall not iile 

with, or transmit to,  the Departm.ent of Motor Vehieles a pm:king fee in, oiee for the 

purpose of having the Departll'lent ofMotorVehieles attem-pt to eolleet UH-paid parking 

fees by  refusing to isstte or rene"  a lieense pttrsuant to Seetioll 12808.1  or refusing to 

rene"  the registration of a vehiele pursuant to Seetion 4760. 

(b) (1) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), an ordinance or resolution enacted 

pursuant to that subdivision does not apply to an offstreet parking facility unless the 

owner or operator has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to 

that offstreet parking facility a notice not less than 17 by 22 inches in size with lettering 

not less than one inch in height, to the effect that the offstreet parking facility is subject 

to public moving vehicle laws and violators may be subject to a parking invoice fee. 

(2) If applicable, a parking receipt distributed to drivers shall include language 

explicitly stating that violators may be subject to a parking invoice fee. 

(c) An ordinance or resolution shall not be enacted pursuant to subdivision (a) 

without a public hearing on the matter and 10 days prior written notice to the owner 

and operator of the privately owned and maintained offstreet parking facility involved. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 132 

(d) Section 22507.8 may be enforced without enactment of an ordinance or 

resolution as required pursuant to subdivision (a) or the posting of a notice at each 

entrance to  the offstreet parking facility as  required by paragraph (1) of subdivision 

(b). 

(e) The department shall not be required to provide patrol or to enforce any 

provision of this code in a privately owned and maintained offstreet parking facility 

subject to this section except those provisions applicable to private property actions 

not described in this section. 

(f) A city, county, or city and county that authorizes private parking regulation 

pursuant to this section shall, in its ordinance or resolution, include provisions that 

include all of the following: 

(1) Procedures for dispute resolution in accordance with Section 40215, including 

all of the following: 

(A) A written and publicly available dispute resolution policy that includes 

specified time periods for notifications, review, and appeal. 

(B) An administrative hearing process that includes all of the following: 

(i) Options for a hearing in person or by mail. 

(ii) Administrative review. 

(iii) A hearing by a third-party examiner who has been adequately trained and 

who provides an independent, objective, fair,  and impartial review. 

(iv) Personal delivery or delivery by first-class mail  of the examiner's decision. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 133 

(v) Authority for the examiner to allow payment of the parking invoice fee  in 

installments for persons showing evidence of inability to pay the parking invoice fee 

in full. 

(2) A prohibition against incentives based on the number of invoices issued or 

the number or percentage of disputed invoices adjudicated that uphold parking invoice 

fees. 

(3) A cap on a parking invoice fee  that is commensurate with the most nearly 

equivalent municipal parking fine. 

(4) Measures to prevent a private parking regulator from representing itself as 

a government enforcement agency, including a prohibition against the use of 

terminology in ordinances, resolutions, and parking fee invoices that is restricted to 

governmental law enforcement and a requirement that a conspicuous statement be 

included on parking fee invoices to the effect that "This parking invoice fee notice is 

not issued by the [local government]." 

SEC.  66.  Section 22651  of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

22651.  A peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5  (commencing with Section 

830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, or a regularly employed and salaried 

employee, who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations, 

of a city, county, or jurisdiction of a state agency in which a vehicle is located, may 

remove a vehicle located within the territorial limits in which the officer or employee 

may act, under the following circumstances: 

(a) When a vehicle is left unattended upon a bridge, viaduct, or causeway or in 

a tube or tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  134 

(b) When a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a highway in a position so as 

to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or in a condition so as to create a hazard to 

other traffic upon the highway. 

(c) When a vehicle is found upon a highway or public land and a report has 

previously been made that the vehicle is stolen or a complaint has been filed and a 

warrant thereon is issued charging that the vehicle was embezzled. 

(d) When a vehicle is illegally parked so as  to block the entrance to  a private 

driveway and it is impractical to move the vehicle from in front of the driveway to 

another point on the highway. 

(e) When a vehicle is illegally parked so as to prevent access by firefighting 

equipment to a fire hydrant and it is  impracticable to move the vehicle from in front 

of the fire hydrant to  another point on the highway. 

(f) When a vehicle, except highway maintenance or construction equipment, is 

stopped, parked, or left standing for more than four hours upon the right-of-way of a 

freeway that has full control of access and no  crossings at grade and the driver, if 

present, cannot move the vehicle under its own power. 

(g) When the person in charge of a vehicle upon a highway or public land is, by 

reason of physical injuries or illness, incapacitated to  an extent so as to be unable to 

provide for its custody or removal. 

(h) (1) When an officer arrests a person driving or in control ofa vehicle for an 

alleged offense and the officer is, by this code or other law, required or permitted to 

take, and does take, the person into custody. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 135 

(2) When an officer serves a notice of an order of suspension or revocation 

pursuant to Section 13388 or 13389. 

(i) (1) When a vehicle, other than a rented vehicle, is found upon a highway or 

public land, or is removed pursuant to this code, and it is known that the vehicle has 

been issued five or more notices of parking violations to which the owner or person 

in control of the vehicle has not responded within 21  calendar days ofnotice of citation 

issuance or citation issuance or 14 calendar days ofthe mailing of a notice of delinquent 

parking violation to the agency responsible for processing notices ofparking violations, 

or the registered owner ofthe vehicle is !mown to have been issued five or more notices 

for failure to pay or failure to appear in court for traffic violations for which a certificate 

has not been issued by the magistrate or clerk of the court hearing the case showing 

that the case has been adjudicated or concerning which the registered owner's record 

has not been cleared pursuant to Chapter 6 ( commencing with Section 41500) of 

Division 17, the vehicle may be impounded until that person furnishes to the impounding 

law enforcement agency all of the following: 

(A) Evidence of his or her identity. 

(B) An address within this state at which he or she can be located. 

(C) Satisfactory evidence that all parking penalties due for the vehicle and all 

other vehicles registered to the registered owner of the impounded vehicle, and all 

1Taffic violations of the registered owner, have been cleared. 

(2) The requirements in subparagraph (C) ofparagraph (1) shall be fully enforced 

by the impounding law enforcement agency on and after the time that the Department 

of Motor Vehicles is able to provide access to the necessary records. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 136 

(3) A notice of parking violation issued for an unlawfully parked vehicle shall 

be accompanied by a warning that repeated violations may result in the impounding 

ofthe vehicle. In lieu of furnishing satisfactory evidence that the full amount ofparking 

penalties or bail has been deposited, that person may demand to be taken without 

unnecessary delay before a magistrate, for traffic offenses, or a hearing examiner, for 

parking offenses, within the county in which the offenses charged are alleged to have 

been committed and who has jurisdiction of the offenses and is nearest or most 

accessible with reference to the place where the vehicle is impounded. Evidence of 

current registration shall be produced after a vehicle has been impounded, or, at the 

discretion of the impounding law enforcement agency, a notice to appear for violation 

of subdivision (a) of Section 4000 shall be issued to that person. 

(4) A vehicle shall be released to the legal owner, as defined in Section 370, if 

the legal owner does-all both of the following: 

(A) Pays the cost of towing and storing the vehicle. 

(B) Submits e~ iclenee ef payment ef fees as prnviclecl in Seetien 9561 . 

(fil Completes an affidavit in a form acceptable to the impounding law 

enforcement agency stating that the vehicle was not in possession of the legal owner 

at the time of occurrence of the offenses relating to standing or parking. A vehicle 

released to a legal owner under this subdivision is  a repossessed vehicle for purposes 

of disposition or sale. The impounding agency shall have a lien on any surplus that 

remains upon sale of the vehicle to which the registered owner is or may be entitled, 

as  security for the full amount of the parking penalties for all notices of parking 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  137 

violations issued for the vehicle and for all local administrative charges imposed 

pursuant to Section 22850.5. The legal owner shall promptly remit to, and deposit with, 

the agency responsible for processing notices of parking violations from that surplus, 

on receipt of that surplus, the full amount of the parking penalties for all notices of 

parking violations issued for the vehicle and for all local administrative charges imposed 

pursuant to  Section 22850.5. 

(5) The impounding agency that has a lien on the surplus that remains upon the 

sale of a vehicle to which a registered owner is  entitled pursuant to paragraph ( 4) has 

a deficiency claim against the registered owner for the full amount of the parking 

penalties for all notices of parking violations issued for the vehicle and for all local 

administrative chaTges imposed pursuant to Section 22850.5, less the amount received 

from the sale of the vehicle. 

(j) When a vehicle is found illegally parked and there are no license plates or 

other evidence ofregistration displayed, the vehicle may be impounded until the owner 

or person in control of the vehicle furnishes the impounding law enforcement agency 

evidence of his or her identity and an  address within this state at which he or she can 

be located. 

(k) When a vehicle is pm·ked or left standing upon a highway for  72 or more 

consecutive hours in violation of a local ordinance authorizing removal. 

(l) When a vehicle is illegally parked on a highway in violation of a local 

ordinance forbidding stm1ding or parking and the use of a highway, or a portion thereof, 

is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the highway, or for the 

installation of underground utilities, and signs giving notice that the vehicle may be 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 138 

removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal by a local authority 

pursuant to the ordinance. 

(m) When the use of the highway, or a portion of the highway, is authorized by 

a local authority for a purpose other than the normal flow oftraffic or for the movement 

ofequipment, articles, or structures ofunusual size, and the parking of a vehicle would 

prohibit or interfere with that use or movement, and signs giving notice that the vehicle 

may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal by a local 

authority pursuant to the ordinance. 

(n) Whenever a vehicle is parked or left standing where local authorities, by 

resolution or ordinance, have prohibited parking and have authorized the removal of 

vehicles. Except as provided in subdivisions (v) and (w), a vehicle shall not be removed 

unless signs are posted giving notice of the removal. 

(o) (1) When a vehicle is found or operated upon a highway, public land, or an 

offstreet parking facility under the following circumstances: 

(A) With a registration expiration date in excess of six months before the date 

it is found or operated on the highway, public lands, or the offstreet parking facility. 

(B) Displaying in, or upon, the vehicle, a registration card, identification card, 

temporary receipt, license plate, special plate, registration sticker, device issued pursuant 

to Section 4853, or permit that was not issued for that vehicle, or is not otherwise 

lawfully used on that vehicle under this code. 

(C) Displaying in, or upon, the vehicle, an altered, forged, counterfeit, or falsified 

registration card, identification card, temporary receipt, license plate, special plate, 

registration sticker, device issued pursuant to  Section 4853, or permit. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  139 

(2) When a vehicle described in paragraph (1) is occupied, only a peace officer, 

as defined in Chapter 4.5 ( commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the 

Penal Code, may remove the vehicle. 

(3) For the purposes ofthis subdivision, the vehicle shall be released under either 

of the following circumstances: 

(A) To  the registered owner or person in control of the vehicle only after the 

owner or person furnishes the storing law enforcement agency with proof of current 

registration and a currently valid driver's license to  operate the vehicle. 

(B) To the legal owner or the legal owner's agency, without payment of any 

fees, fines, or penalties for parking tickets or registration and without proof of current 

registration, if the vehicle will only be transported pursuant to the exemption specified 

in Section 4022 and if the legal owner does all of the following: 

(i) Pays the cost of towing and storing the vehicle. 

(ii) Completes an affidavit in a form acceptable to the impounding law 

enforcement agency stating that the vehicle was not in possession of the legal owner 

at the time ofoccurrence ofan offense relating to standing or parking. A vehicle released 

to  a legal owner under this subdivision is a repossessed vehicle for purposes of 

disposition or sale. The impounding agency has a lien on any surplus that remains upon 

sale of the vehicle to which the registered owner is or may be entitled, as security for 

the full amount of parking penalties for any notices of parking violations issued for 

the vehicle and for all local administrative charges imposed pursuant to Section 22850.5. 

Upon receipt of any surplus, the legal owner shall promptly remit to, and deposit with, 

the agency responsible for processing notices of parking violations from that surplus, 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 140 

the full amount of the parking penalties for all notices of parking violations issued for 

the vehicle and for all local administrative charges imposed pursuant to Section 22850.5. 

(4) The impounding agency that has a lien on the surplus that remains upon the 

sale of a vehicle to which a registered owner is entitled has a deficiency claim against 

the registered owner for the full amount ofparking penalties for any notices of parking 

violations issued for the vehicle and for all local administrative charges imposed 

pursuant to Section 22850.5, less the amount received from the sale of the vehicle. 

(5) As used in this subdivision, "offstreet parking facility" means an offstreet 

facility held open for use by the public for parking vehicles and includes a publicly 

owned facility for offstreet parking, and a privately owned facility for offstreet parking 

if a fee is not charged for the privilege to park and it is held open for the common 

public use of retail customers. 

(p) When the peace officer issues the driver of a vehicle a notice to  appear for 

a violation of Section 12500, 14601, 14601.1, 14601.2, 14601.3, 14601.4, 14601.5, or 

14604 and the vehicle is not impounded pursuant to Section 22655.5. A vehicle so 

removed from the highway or public land,  or from private property after having been 

on a highway or public land, shall not be released to the registered owner or his or her 

agent, except upon presentation ofthe registered owner's or his or her agent's currently 

valid driver's license to operate the vehicle and proof of current vehicle registration, 

to the impounding law enforcement agency, or upon order of a court. 

(q) Wben a vehicle is parked for more than 24 hours on a portion of highway 

that is located within the boundaries of a common interest development, as defined in 

Section 4100 or 6534 of the Civil Code, and signs, as required by paragraph (1) of 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  141 

subdivision (a) of Section 22658 of this code, have been posted on that portion of 

highway providing notice to drivers that vehicles parked thereon for more than 24 

hours will be removed at the owner's expense, pursuant to a resolution or ordinance 

adopted by the local authority. 

(r) When a vehicle is illegally parked and blocks the movement of a legally 

parked vehicle. 

(s) ( 1) When a vehicle, except highway maintenance or construction equipment, 

an authorized emergency vehicle, or a vehicle that is properly permitted or otherwise 

authorized by the Department of Transportation, is stopped, parked, or left standing 

for more than eight hours within a roadside rest area or viewpoint. 

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), when a commercial motor vehicle, as defined 

in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 15210, is stopped, parked, or left standing 

for more than  10 hours within a roadside rest area or viewpoint. 

(3) For purposes ofthis subdivision, a roadside rest area or viewpoint is a publicly 

maintained vehicle parking area, adjacent to a highway, utilized for the convenient, 

safe stopping of a vehicle to  enable motorists to rest or to view the scenery. If two or 

more roadside rest areas are located on opposite sides of the highway, or upon the 

center divider, within seven miles of each other, then that combination of rest areas is 

considered to be the same rest area. 

(t) When a peace officer issues a notice to appear for a violation of Section 25279. 

(u) When a peace officer issues a citation for a violation of Section 11700 and 

the vehicle is being offered for sale. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 142 

(v) (1) When a vehicle is a mobile billboard advertising display, as defined in 

Section 395.5, and is parked or left standing in violation of a local resolution or 

ordinance adopted pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 21100, ifthe registered owner 

of the vehicle was previously issued a warning citation for the same offense, pursuant 

to paragraph (2). 

(2) Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of Section 22507, a city or county, in lieu 

of posting signs noticing a local ordinance prohibiting mobile billboard advertising 

displays adopted pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 21100, may provide notice by 

issuing a warning citation advising the registered owner of the vehicle that he or she 

may be subject to penalties upon a subsequent violation of the ordinance, that may 

include the removal of the vehicle as provided in paragraph (1). A city or county is not 

required to provide further notice for a subsequent violation prior to the enforcement 

of penalties for a violation of the ordinance. 

(w) ( 1) When a vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of a local ordinance 

or resolution adopted pursuant to subdivision (p) of Section 21100, if the registered 

owner of the vehicle was previously issued a warning citation for the same offense, 

pursuant to paragraph (2). 

(2) Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of Section 22507, a city or county, in  lieu 

ofposting signs noticing a local ordinance regulating advertising signs adopted pursuant 

to  subdivision (p) of Section 21100, may provide notice by issuing a warning citation 

advising the registered owner of the vehicle that he or she may be subject to penalties 

upon a subsequent violation of the ordinance that may include the removal of the 

vehicle as provided in paragraph (1 ). A city or county is not required to provide further 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 143 

notice for a subsequent violation prior to the enforcement of penalties for a violation 

of the ordinance. 

SEC. 67.  Section 22651.8 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

22651.8.  Fer pt1rpeses efparagraph (1) ef subdi,isien (i) ef Seetien 22651 and 

Seetien 22651. 7, "satisfaetery  e, idenee" ineludes, but is net limited te, a eepy  ef a 

reeeipt isst1ed by the department purst1ant te st1bdi, isien (a) ef Seetien 4760 for the 

payment efnetiees efparking  ,ielatiens appearing en the department's reeerds at the 

time efpayment. The prneessing ageney shall, within 72 hems efreeeiving that 

satisfaetery evidenee, ttpdate its reeerds te reflect the payments made te the department. 

If the prneessing ageney  <lees  net reeei, e the ametlll:t ef the pad<ing penalties and 

administrative fues  frem the department "ithin four menths ef the date ef isst1anee ef 

that satisfaetery  e, idenee, the prneessing ageney  may  re, ise its reeerds te refleet that 

ne payments  were reeeived for  the netiees tJfparking  ,ielatien. 

SEC. 68.  Section 23575 of the Vehicle Code, as amended by Section 32 of 

Chapter 783  of the Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

23575.  (a) (1) In addition to any other law, the court may require that a person 

convicted of a first offense violation of Section 23152 er 23153 install a functioning, 

certified ignition interlock device on any vehicle that the person operates and prohibit 

that person from operating a motor vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with a 

functioning,  certified ignition interlock device. The court shall give heightened 

consideration to applying this sanction to a first offense violator with 0.15 percent or 

more, by weight, of alcohol in his or her blood at arrest, or with two or more prior 

moving traffic violations, or to persons who refused the chemical tests at arrest. If the 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  144 

court orders the ignition interlock device restriction, the term shall be determined by 

the court for a period not to exceed three years from the date of conviction. The court 

shall notify the Department ofMotor Vehicles, as specified in subdivision (a) of Section 

1803, of the terms of the restrictions in accordance with subdivision (a) of Section 

1804. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall place the restriction in the person's 

records in the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(2) The court shall require a person convicted of a violation of Section 14601.2 

to install a functioning, certified ignition interlock device on any vehicle that the person 

operates and prohibit the person from operating a motor vehicle unless the vehicle is 

equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock device. The term of the 

restriction shall be determined by the court for a period not to exceed three years from 

the date of conviction. The court shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles, as 

specified in subdivision ( a) of Section 1803, ofthe terms ofthe restrictions in accordance 

with subdivision (a)  of Section 1804. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall place 

the restriction in the person's records in the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(b) The court shall include on the abstract of conviction or violation submitted 

to the Department of Motor Vehicles under Section 1803  or 1816 the requirement and 

term for the use of a functioning, certified ignition interlock device. The records of the 

department shall reflect mandatory use ofthe device for the term ordered by the court. 

(c) The court shall advise the person that installation of a functioning,  certified 

ignition interlock device on a vehicle does not allow the person to drive without a valid 

driver's license. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  145 

(d) A person whose driving privilege is  restricted by the court pursuant to this 

section shall arrange for each vehicle with a functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device to be serviced by the installer at least once every 60 days in order for the installer 

to recalibrate and monitor the operation of the device. The installer shall notify the 

court if the device is removed or indicates that the person has attempted to remove, 

bypass, or tamper with the device, or if the person has failed to comply with a 

requirement for the maintenance or calibration of the ignition interlock device. There 

is no obligation for the installer to notify the court if the person has complied with all 

of the requirements of this article. 

(e) The court shall monitor the installation and maintenance of a functioning, 

certified ignition interlock device restriction ordered pursuant to subdivision (a) or (l). 

If a person fails to  comply with the court order, the court shall give notice of the fact 

to the department pursuant to  Section 40509 .1. 

(f) (1) Ifa person is convicted ofa violation of Section 23152 or 23153 and the 

offense occurred within 10 years of one or more separate violations of Section 23152 

er 23153 or two or more violations of Section 23152 that resulted in a conviction, or 

ifa person is convicted of a violation of Section 23103, as specified in Section 23103.5, 

and is suspended for one year under Section 13353.3, the person may apply to the 

Department of Motor Vehicles for a restricted driver's license pursuant to Section 

13352 or 13353.3 that prohibits the person from operating a motor vehicle unless that 

vehicle is equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock device, certified 

pursuant to  Section 13386. The restriction shall remain in effect for at least the 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 146 

remaining period of the original suspension or revocation and until all reinstatement 

requirements in Section 13352 or 13353.4 are met. 

(2) Pursuant to subdivision (g), the Department of Motor Vehicles shall 

immediately terminate the restriction issued pursuant to Section 13352 or 13353.3 and 

shall immediately suspend or revoke the privilege to operate a motor vehicle of a person 

who attempts to remove, bypass, or tamper with the device, who has the device removed 

prior to the termination date of the restriction, or who has failed to  comply with any 

requirement for the maintenance or calibration of the ignition interlock device ordered 

pursuant to Section 13352 or 13353.3. The privilege shall remain suspended or revoked 

for the remaining period of the originating suspension or revocation and until all 

reinstatement requirements in Section 13352 or 13353.4 are met, except that if the 

person provides proof to the satisfaction of the department that he or she is in 

compliance with the restriction issued pursuant to this section, the department may, in 

its discretion, restore the privilege to operate a motor vehicle and reimpose the remaining 

term of the restriction. 

(g) A person whose driving privilege is restricted by the Department of Motor 

Vehicles pursuant to Section 13352 or 13353.3 shall arrange for each vehicle with a 

functioning, certified ignition interlock device to be serviced by the installer at least 

once every 60 days in order for the installer to recalibrate the device and monitor the 

operation of the device. The installer shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles 

if the device is removed or indicates that the person has attempted to remove, bypass, 

or tamper with the device, or if the person has failed to comply with any requirement 

for the maintenance or calibration ofthe ignition interlock device. There is no obligation 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  147 

on the part of the installer to notify the department or the court if the person has 

complied with all of the requirements of this section. 

(h) Nothing in this section pennits a person to drive without a valid driver's 

license. 

(i) The Department of Motor Vehicles shall include information along with the 

order of suspension or revocation for repeat offenders informing them that after a 

specified period of suspension or revocation has been completed, the person may either 

install a functioning, certified ignition interlock device on any vehicle that the person 

operates or remain with a suspended or revoked driver's license. 

G) Pursuant to this section, an out-of-state resident who otherwise would qualify 

for a functioning,  certified ignition interlock device restricted license in  California 

shall be prohibited from operating a motor vehicle in California unless that vehicle is 

equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock device. An ignition interlock 

device is not required to be installed on any vehicle owned by the defendant that is not 

driven in California. 

(k) If a medical problem does not permit a person to breathe with sufficient 

strength to activate the device, that person shall only have the suspension option. 

(l) This section does not restrict a court from requiring installation of a 

functioning, certified ignition interlock device and prohibiting operation of a motor 

vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock 

device for a person to whom subdivision (a)  or (b) does not apply. The term of the 

restriction shall be determined by the court for a period not to exceed three years from 

the date of conviction. The court shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles,  as 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  148 

specified in subdivision ( a) ofSection 1803, ofthe terms ofthe restrictions in accordance 

with subdivision (a) of Section 1804. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall place 

the restriction in the person's records in the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(m) For the purposes of this section, "vehicle" does not include a motorcycle 

until the state certifies an ignition interlock device that can be installed on a motorcycle. 

Any person subject to an ignition interlock device restriction shall not operate a 

motorcycle for the duration of the ignition interlock device restriction period. 

(n) (1) For the purposes of this section, "owned" means solely owned or owned 

in conjunction with another person or legal entity. 

(2) For purposes of this section, "operates" includes operating a vehicle that is 

not owned by the person subject to this section. 

(o) For the purposes of this section, "bypass" means either of the following: 

(1) Failure to take any random retest. 

(2) Failure to pass a random retest with a blood alcohol concentration not 

exceeding 0.03 percent, by weight of alcohol, in the person's blood. 

(p) The department shall adopt regulations specifying the intervals between 

random retests. 

(q) For purposes of this section, "random retest" means a breath test performed 

by the driver upon a certified ignition interlock device at random intervals after the 

initial engine startup breath test and while the vehicle's motor is running. 

(r) This section shall remain in effect only until January  1, 2019, and as of that 

date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January  1,  2019, 

deletes or extends that date. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 149 

SEC. 69.  Section 23575 ofthe Vehicle Code, as added by Section 34 of Chapter 

783  of the Statutes of 2016, is amended to read: 

23575.  (a) (1) In addition to any other Jaw,  the court may require that a person 

convicted of a first offense violation of Section 23152 er 23153  install a functioning, 

certified ignition interlock device on any vehicle that the person operates and prohibit 

that person from operating a motor vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with a 

functioning,  certified ignition interlock device. The court shall give heightened 

consideration to applying this sanction to  a first offense violator with 0.15 percent or 

more, by weight, of alcohol in his or her blood at arrest, or with two or more prior 

moving traffic violations, or to persons who refused the chemical tests at arrest. If the 

court orders the ignition interlock device restriction, the term shall be determined by 

the court for a period not to exceed three years from the date of conviction. The court 

shall notify the Department ofMotor Vehicles, as specified in subdivision (a) of Section 

1803, of the terms of the restrictions in accordance with subdivision (a) of Section 

1804. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall place the restriction in the person's 

records in the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(2) The court shall require a person convicted of a violation of Section 14601.2 

to install a functioning, certified ignition interlock device on any vehicle that the person 

operates and prohibit the person from operating a motor vehicle unless the vehicle is 

equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock device. The term of the 

restriction shall be determined by the court for a period not to exceed three years from 

the date of conviction. The court shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles, as 

specified in subdivision ( a) ofSection 1803, ofthe tenns ofthe restrictions in accordance 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  150 

with subdivision (a) of Section 1804. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall place 

the restriction in the person's records in the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(b) The court shall include on the abstract of conviction or violation submitted 

to the Department of Motor Vehicles under Section 1803 or 1816 the requirement and 

term for the use of a fm1ctioning, certified ignition interlock device. The records of the 

department shall reflect mandatory use of the device for the term ordered by the court. 

(c) The court shall advise the person that installation of a functioning,  certified 

ignition interlock device on a vehicle does not allow the person to drive without a valid 

driver's license. 

(d) A person whose driving privilege is restricted by the court pursuant to this 

section shall arrange for each vehicle with a functioning,  certified ignition interlock 

device to be serviced by the installer at least once every 60 days in order for the installer 

to recalibrate and monitor the operation of the device. The installer shall notify the 

court if the device is removed or indicates that the person has attempted to remove, 

bypass, or tamper with the device, or if the person has failed to comply with a 

requirement for the maintenance or calibration of the ignition interlock device. There 

is no obligation for the installer to notify the court if the person has complied with all 

of the requirements of this article. 

(e) The court shall monitor the installation and maintenance of a functioning, 

certified ignition interlock device restriction ordered pursuant to subdivision (a) or (T). 

If a person fails to comply with the court order, the court shall give notice of the fact 

to the department pursuant to  Section 40509.1. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 151 

(f) (1) If a person is convicted of a violation of Section 23152 or 23153 and the 

offense occurred within 10 years of one or more separate violations of Section 23152 

er 23153 23153 or two or more violations of Section 23152 that resulted in a conviction, 

or ifa person is convicted ofa violation of Section 23103, as specified in Section 

23103.5, and is suspended for one year under Section 13353.3, the person may apply 

to the Department of Motor Vehicles for a restricted driver's license pursuant to Section 

13352 or 13353.3 that prohibits the person from operating a motor vehicle unless that 

vehicle is equipped with a functioning,  certified ignition interlock device, certified 

pursuant to  Section 13386. The restriction shall remain in effect for at least the 

remaining period of the original suspension or revocation and until all reinstatement 

requirements in Section 13352 or 13353.4 are met. 

(2) Pursuant to subdivision (g), the Department of Motor Vehicles shall 

immediately terminate the restriction issued pursuant to Section 13352 or 13353.3 and 

shall immediately suspend or revoke the privilege to operate a motor vehicle of a person 

who attempts to remove, bypass, or tamper with the device, who has the device removed 

prior to the termination date of the restriction, or who has failed to comply with any 

requirement for the maintenance or calibration of the ignition interlock device ordered 

pursuant to Section 13352 or 13353.3. The privilege shall remain suspended orrevoked 

for the remaining period of the originating suspension or revocation and until all 

reinstatement requirements in Section 13352 or 13353.4 are met, except that if the 

person provides proof to the satisfaction of the department that he or she is  in 

compliance with the restriction issued pursuant to this section, the department may, in 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  152 

its discretion, restore the privilege to operate a motor vehicle and reimpose the remaining 

term of the restriction. 

(g) A person whose driving privilege is restricted by the Department of Motor 

Vehicles pursuant to  Section 13352 or 13353.3 shall arrange for each vehicle with a 

functioning,  certified ignition interlock device to be serviced by the installer at least 

once every 60 days in order for the installer to recalibrate the device and monitor the 

operation of the device. The installer shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles 

if the device is removed or indicates that the person has attempted to remove, bypass, 

or tamper with the device, or if the person has failed to comply with any requirement 

for the maintenance or calibration ofthe ignition interlock device. There is no obligation 

on the part of the installer to notify the department or the court if the person has 

complied with all of the requirements of this section. 

(h) Nothing in this section permits a person to drive without a valid driver's 

license. 

(i) The Department of Motor Vehicles shall include information along with the 

order of suspension or revocation for repeat offenders informing them that after a 

specified period of suspension or revocation has been completed, the person may either 

install a functioning, certified ignition interlock device on any vehicle that the person 

owns or operates or remain with a suspended or revoked driver's license. 

(j) Pursuant to this section, an out-of-state resident who otherwise would qualify 

for a functioning, certified ignition interlock device restricted license in California 

shall be prohibited from operating a motor vehicle in California unless that vehicle is 

equipped with a functioning,  certified ignition interlock device. An ignition interlock 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  153 

device is not required to be installed on any vehicle owned by the defendant that is not 

driven in California. 

(k) If a medical problem does not permit a person to breathe with sufficient 

strength to activate the device, that person shall only have the suspension option. 

(l)  This section does not restrict a court from requiring installation of a 

functioning, certified ignition interlock device and prohibiting operation of a motor 

vehicle unless that vehicle is equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock 

device for a person to  whom subdivision (a)  or (b) does not apply. The term of the 

restriction shall be determined by the court for a period not to exceed three years from 

the date of conviction. The court shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles, as 

specified in subdivision (a) of Section 1803, ofthe terms ofthe restrictions in accordance 

with subdivision (a) of Section 1804. The Department of Motor Vehicles shall place 

the restriction in the person's records in the Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(m) For the purposes of this section, "vehicle" does not include a motorcycle 

until the state certifies an ignition interlock device that can be installed on a motorcycle. 

Any person subject to an ignition interlock device restriction shall not operate a 

motorcycle for the duration of the ignition interlock device restriction period. 

(n) (I) For the purposes of this section, "owned" means solely owned or owned 

in conjunction with another person or legal entity. 

(2) For purposes of this section, "operates" includes operating a vehicle that is 

not owned by the person subject to this section. 

(o) For the purposes of this section, "bypass" means either of the following: 

( l) Failure to take any random retest. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  154 

(2) Failure to pass a random retest with a blood alcohol concentration not 

exceeding 0.03 percent, by weight of alcohol, in the person's blood. 

(p) For purposes of this section, "random retest" means a breath test performed 

by the driver upon a certified ignition interlock device at random intervals after the 

initial engine startup breath test and while the vehicle's motor is running. 

(q) This section shall become operative January 1, 2026. 

SEC. 70.  Section 40002.1  of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40002.1.  (a) Whenever a person has failed to appear in the court designated in 

the notice to appear or a verified complaint specified in Section 40002, following 

personal service of the notice of noncompliance or deposit in the mail pursuant to 

Section 22, the magistrate or clerk of the court may give notice of that fact to the 

department. 

(b) Whenever the matter is adjudicated, including a dismissal of the charges 

upon forfeiture of bail or otherwise, the magistrate or clerk of the court hearing the 

matter shall immediately do all  of the following: 

(1) Endorse a certificate to that effect. 

(2) Provide the person or the person's attorney with a copy of the certificate. 

(3) Transmit a copy of the certificate to the department. 

(c) A notice of noncompliance shall not be transmitted to the department pursuant 

to subdivision (a) if a warrant of arrest has been issued on the same offense pursuant 

to subdivision (b)  of Section 40002. A warrant of arrest shall not be issued pursuant 

to subdivision (b) of Section 40002 if a notice of noncompliance has been transmitted 

to the department on the same offense pursuant to this seetian, exeept that,  "hen a 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  155 

nfltiee has been r-eeei, ed by  the emtrt rmrsuant tfl  subdivisifln (e) 5f Seetifln 4766 5r­

r-eealled bj m5ti5n 5fthe emut, a  wan ant l'Iiii'.)  then be isstted.  section. 

SEC. 71.  Section 40200.5 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40200.5.  (a) Except as provided in subdivision (c) of Section 40200.4, an issuing 

agency may elect to contract with the county, with a private vendor, or with any other 

city or county processing agency, other than the Department ofthe California Highway 

Patrol or other state law enforcement agency, within the county, with the consent of 

that other entity, for the processing of notices of parking violations and notices of 

delinquent parking violations, prior to filing with the court pursuant to Section 40230. 

If an issuing agency contracts with a private vendor for processing services, it 

shall give special consideration to minority business enterprise participation in providing 

those services. For purposes of this subdivision, "special consideration" has the same 

meaning as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 14838 of the Government Code, as 

it relates to small business preference. 

(b) A contract entered pursuant to subdivision (a) shall provide for monthly 

distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except those amounts payable 

to a county pursuant to Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 76000) of Title 8 ofthe 

Government C5de and amflunts Pii'.i able tfl the Department 5fl,fot5r-Vehieles pttrsuairt 

tfl  Seetifln 4763 5fthis e5de.  Code. 

(c) Ifa contract entered into pursuant to  subdivision (a) includes the provision 

of qualified examiners or administrative hearing providers, the contract shall be based 

on either a fixed monthly rate or on the number of notices processed and shall not 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  156 

include incentives for the processing entity based on the number of notices upheld or 

denied or the amount of fines collected. 

SEC. 72.  Section 40211  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

40211.  (a) If the registered e" ner, er frl'I  agent ef the registered e" ner, er a 

rentee er lessee whe was ser, ed "ith the netiee ef delinquent parking vielatien pursuant 

te Seetien 40206 er Seetien 40209, er any  tither persen whe presents the netiee ef 

parking vielatien er netiee efdelinqtten:t pB1king  , ielatien after the netiee efdelinqttent 

parkittg , ielatien has been issued for deli, ery  ttnder Seetien 40206, depesits the parking 

penalty with a persen autheri:z:ed te reeei, e it, the prneessing ageney shall de beth ef 

the folle .ving: 

(1) Deliver a eepy  efene efthe folle,ving:  the netiee efdelinqttent parking 

vielatien issued under Seetien 40206; a true and eerreet abstraet eentaining the 

infermatien set forth ir, the netiee ef parking  oielatien if the eitatien ·,vas issued 

eleetrenieallj; er an eleetrnnieally reprndtteed listing efthe eitatien informatien 

presettted in a netiee efdelinquent parking ,·ielatien te the persen and reeerd the name, 

address, Md driver's lieense nttmber efthe persen aetually gi,en the eepy in ~be reeerds 

efthe issuing ageney. 

Fer the p ttrpeses ef this paragraph, a eepy ef the netiee ef delinque1rt parking 

vielatien may  be a phetestatie eepy. 

(2) Determine  "hether the netiee ef delinqnent parking Yielatien has been filed 

with the department pttrsttant te subdivisien (b) ef Seetien 40220 er a ei,iljudgment 

has been e1rtered pttrsuB1rt te Seetien 40220. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  157 

(b) If the notiee of delintJ:t1ent parking violl:ttion has not been filed v,ith the 

dep!t!tment 01 judgment entered !t!!d p!t)ment of the parking penalty, inelt1ding any 

!t]'lplieable assessments, is reeeived, the proeeedings tinder this artiele shall terminate. 

(e) If the notiee of delintJ:Uent parking  , ioll:ttion has been filed  "ith the 

department, has been returned under subtii,ision (b) m  (e) of Seetion 4760 or Seetion 

4764, !t!!d p!t)ment of the parking penalty tegethei  o,ith the administrative service fue 

ofthe precessing agency for costs ofservice and !t!fy !t]'lplieable assessments is reeei ,ed, 

the pmeeedings tlllder this artiele shall terminl:tte. 

(d) Ifthe notiee ofdelintJ:Uent parking , ioll:ttion has been filed "ith the departrnent 

!t!!d has not been rettJrned under  Seetion 4760, 4762, !t!!d 4764, !t!!d payment of the 

parking penalty  for,  and !t!IY !t]'lplieable eosts of, sen iee in eonneetion  "ith ei, ii debt 

eolleetion, is reeei, ed by the prneessing ageney, the prneessing agency  shall do all of 

the following: 

(I) Deli, er a eertifieate ofp!t)ttten', to the registered owner, the agent, ~be lessee, 

or the rentee or other person making the payment. 

(2) Immediately tr!t!lsmit ~be  payment informl:ttion to the dep!t! tment in the 

tttanner prescribed by  the department. 

(3) Terminate proeeedings on the notice of delintJ:Uent parking  , iolation. 

(4) Transmit for deposit all pruking penalties !t!!d assessmeIIts in aeeord!t!!ee 

wi~b lavv. 

SEC. 73.  Section 40211  is  added to the Vehicle Code, to read: 

40211.  (a) If the registered owner, or an agent of the registered owner, or a 

rentee or lessee who was served with the notice ofdelinquent parking violation pursuant 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  158 

to Section 40206 or Section 40209, or any other person who presents the notice of 

parking violation or notice ofdelinquent parking violation after the notice ofdelinquent 

parking violation has been issued for delivery under Section 40206, deposits the parking 

penalty with a person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall deliver a 

copy of one of the following:  the notice of delinquent parking violation issued under 

Section 40206; a true and correct abstract containing the information set forth in the 

notice ofparking violation ifthe citation was issued electronically; or an electronically 

reproduced listing ofthe citation information presented in a notice ofdelinquent parking 

violation to the person and record the name, address, and driver's license number of 

the person actually given the copy in the records of the issuing agency. 

(b) For the purposes of this section, a copy of the notice of delinquent parking 

violation may be a photostatic copy. 

SEC. 74.  Section 40220 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40220.  (l!)._Except as otherwise provided in Seetiens 40221 Mel Section 40222, 

the processing agency shall prneeeel tmeler efll)  one of the followiflg optiofls ifl oreler 

to eolleet an t!IlfJaiel par1<iflg penalty: 

(a) File fill  itemization of ttttpaiel parking peflalties Mel ser, iee fees  "ith the 

elepartmerct for eolleetion  "ith the registration of the  , ehiele pursuant to Seetiofl 4760. 
tb1-lf may, ifmore than four hundred dollars ($400) in unpaid penalties and fees 

have been accrued by any person or registered owner, proof thereof may  he fileel file 

proof thereof with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution may 

be levied and other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are 

authorized for the collection of an unpaid civil judgment entered against a defendant 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  159 

in an action on a debtor. The court may assess costs against a judgment debtor to be 

paid upon satisfaction of the judgment. The processing agency shall send a notice by 

first-class mail to the person or registered owner indicating that a judgment shall be 

entered for the unpaid penalties, fees,  and costs and that, after 21  calendar days from 

the date of the mailing of the notice, the judgment shall have the same effect as an 

entry ofjudgment against a judgment debtor. The person or registered owner shall also 

be notified at that time that execution may be levied against his or her assets, liens may 

be placed against his or her property, his or her wages may be garnisheed, and other 

steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. Ifa judgment is rendered for the processing 

agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency to collect the amount of 

that judgment. 

Net" ithst!tftding 

(b) Notwithstanding any other pm,·isien eflaw, the processing agency shall pay 

the established first paper civil filing fee at the time an entry of civil judgment is 

requested. 

(e) If the registr!ttien efthe vehiele has net been renewed for 60 days bey end 

the renev,al date, !tftd the eitatien has net been eelleeted by the department pursttant 

te Seetien 4760, :lile pmef ef tttlpaid penalties !tftd fees  ,vith the eeurt ,v'ith the sftll1e 

effect as a ei, il j ttdgment as pm, ided in sttbdi, isien (b). 

(d) This seetien dees net apply  tea registered ev,ner efa ,·chicle if the eitatien 

was issued prier te the registered e wner taking pessessien ef t1te  , ehiele and the 

department has neti:lied the precessing agency  pttrsuant te Seetien 4764. 

SEC. 75.  Section 40221  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  160 

40221.  The proeessing 1:1:geney  shall notiile a ei, ii j tttlgment  "ith the eourt 

relating to a parkiflg  , iolatiofl "hieh has bem J§Jetl  vv ith the tlepartmen-t ttflless the 

proeessing 1:1:gency has determined that the registration of the  , ehiele has not been 

renewed for 60 days beyond the rene" al date and the eitation has not been eolleeted 

by the departmen-t pttrsttan-t to Seetion 4760 

SEC.  76.  Section 40222 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40222.  (l!)_The processing agency shall terminate proceedings on a notice of a 

delinquent parking violation or violations in all of the fol!o .. ing eases: 

(a) Upon reeeipt of eolleetetl penalties and atlministrative fees remitted by  the 

tlepattment untler Seetion 4762 for that notiee ofdelinfj"tlent parking  violation or 

,iolations. The termination under this sttbdi,ision is by satisfaetion of the parking 

penalty 01  penalties. 

(b) If the r,otiee of a tlelinqtten-t parking  , iolation or , iolations  "as retumetl to 

the proeessing ageney  pttrsttant to Seetion 4764 and tive years ha,e elapsed since the 

date of the last , iolation. The termination untler this subtli, ision is by the running of 

a statute oflimitation ofproeeetlings. 

(e) The proeessing ageney reeei, es informatiofl, that it shall veriry  "ith the 

departmen-t, that the peflalty or penalties have been paid to the depat tment pursttaflt to 

Seetion 4762. 

(d) (1) Ifif the registered owner of the vehicle provides proof to the processing 

agency that he or she was not the registered owner on the date of the violation. 

05/21/17  10: 10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 161 

(hl This sttbdh isitln section does not limit or impair the ability or the right of 

the processing agency to pursue the collection of a delinquent parking violation or 

violations from the person who was the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle on 

the date of the violation. 

SEC.  77.  Section 40224 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

40224.  The time limitatitln prnvided by law fof etlmmeneement tlf a eivil aetitln 

for a vitllatitln speeified in Seetitln 40200 shall be ttllled frtlm and after the date a ntltiee 

tlfdelinqttent patking ,itllatitln is filed  with the department ptlfsttant ttl  sttbdhisitln 

(b) tlf Seetitln 40220 ttntil the ntltiee is retttrned ttl the prneessing agene,  ttnder 

sttbdivisitln (b) tlf Seetitln 4760 m Seetitln 4762 tlf 4764 tlf is reealled by the prneessing 

ageney pmsmmt ttl  sttbdwisitln (d) tlf Seetitm 402: I. 

SEC. 78.  Section 40266 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

40266.  (a) If the registered tlwner, tlr an agent tlfthe registered tl\l\ncr,  tlr a 

rentee tlf lessee  whtl  v,as  ser,ed with the mitiee tlfdelinqttent ttlll e,asitln  1itllatiem 

pttrsttant ttl  Seetitln 40260 m 40264, tlr all.'.)  tlther perstln v,htl presents the ntltiee tlf 

ttlll e, asitln  , itllatitln tlf ntltiee tlf delinqttent ttlll evasitln vitllatitln after the 1mtiee tlf 

delinqttent ttlll evasitln vitllatitln has been isstted for deli,er'.)  ttnder Seetitln 40260, 

deptlsits that ttlll evasitln  , itllatitln penalty with a perstln attthmized ttl  reeeh e it, the 

prneessing agenej  shall dtl btlth tlfthe fo1ltl10ing: 

(I) Deli,er a etlp'.)  tlfthe ntltiee e,fdelinqttent ttlll v,asie,n  ,itllatitln isstted undet 

Seetitln 40260, tlr a listing tlfthe ne,tiee informatitln presented in a ntltiee e,fdelinqttent 

ttlll e,asitln ,itllatitln ttl the perstln fll!d reee,rd the name, address, fl!ld dri,er's lieense 

muttber tlfthe perstln ae~ually gh en the etlp'.)  in the reee,rds  tlf the isstting agene'.). 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  162 

For the ptll'j'loses ofthis paragraph, a copy ofthe notice of delinq-uent toll evasion 

violation mft'.Y  be a photostatic copy. 

(2) Determine vthether the notice of delinq-uent toll eyasion  , iolation has been 

filed with the departnient pttrst1ant to sttbdi, ision (b) of Section 40267 or a civil 

jttdgment has been entered pt1rsttant to Section 40267. 

(b) If the notice of delinqt1ent toll e·tasion violation has not been filed  "ith the 

depru:tment or jttdgment entered and Pft'.Y ment of the toll e, asion penalty  and any 

applicable assessments is reeeiv ed, the proceedings ttnder this article shall terminate. 

(e) Ifthe notiee of delinq-uent toll evasion  , iolation has been filed with the 

departmen-t, has been retmn-ed to the processing agene:i  pttrst1ant to sttbdi, ision (b) or 

(e) of Section 4770 or pmsttant to Section 4774, and Pft'.Y ment ofthe toll e, as ion penalty 

together "ith the athninistrafr,·e service fee ofthe processing agency for costs of service 

and all)  applicable assessment is reeeiv ed, the proceedings tinder this article shall 

terminate. 

(d) If the notice ofdelinqt1en{ toll C',asion  ,iolation has been filed  .,ith the 

department and has not been re~umed to the processing agency  pt1rsttan{ to Section 

4770, 4772, or 4774, and pft'.Yme1tt ofthe toll C'iasion penalty· toge~ber  ,.ith the 

adminis~Tati, e fee ofthe department established ttllder Section 4773, and administrafrte 

sen iee fee of the isstting agene:i  for costs of ser , iee, ar,d fill)  applicable assessments 

is reeei,ed by the processing agency, the processing agency shall do all ofthe following: 

(!) Immediately  transmit the payment information to the departme1tt in the 

manner prescribed b:i  the depru: tment. 

(2) Terminate proceedings on the notiee of delinqttent toll evasion  , iolation. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  163 

(3) Tnmsmit for de1msit all tell evasien penalties l:lfld assessments in aeeerdl:lflee 

,.ith la,·,. 

SEC. 79.  Section 40266 is added to the Vehicle Code, to read: 

40266.  (a)  If the registered owner, or an agent of the registered owner, or a 

rentee or lessee who was served with the notice of delinquent toll evasion violation 

pursuant to Section 40260 or 40264, or any other person who presents the notice of 

toll evasion violation or notice of delinquent toll evasion violation after the notice of 

delinquent toll evasion violation has been issued for delivery under Section 40260, 

deposits that toll evasion violation penalty with a person authorized to receive it, the 

processing agency shall deliver a copy ofthe notice of delinquent toll evasion violation 

issued under Section 40260, or a listing of the notice information presented in a notice 

of delinquent toll evasion violation to the person and record the name, address, and 

driver's license number of the person actually given the copy in the records of the 

issuing agency. 

(b) For the purposes of this paragraph, a copy of the notice of delinquent toll 

evasion violation may be a photostatic copy. 

SEC. 80.  Section 40267 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40267.  Except as otherwise provided in Seetiens 40268 l:lfld Section 40269, the 

processing agency shall proceed under one or more of the following options to collect 

an unpaid toll evasion penalty: 

(a) The prneessing agency fl'll:l)  tile l:lfl itemizatien ef ttllj'laid tell e, Mien penalties 

l:lfld administrati, e l:lfld  set , ice fees  "ith ~be depat tment for eeHeetien ;vith the 

registfaticln eftlte  ,eltiele pursuant te Seetien 4770. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 164 

JJ0. (1) If more than four hundred dollars ($400) in unpaid penalties and fees 

have been accrued by a person or registered owner, the processing agency may file 

proof of that fact with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution 

may be levied and other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as 

are authorized for the collection of an unpaid civil judgment entered against a defendant 

in an action on a debt. The court may assess costs against a judgment debtor to be paid 

upon satisfaction of the judgment. The processing agency shall send a notice by 

first-class mail to the person or registered owner indicating that a judgment shall be 

entered for the unpaid penalties, fees,  and costs and that, after 30 days from the date 

of the mailing of the notice, the judgment shall have the same effect as an entry of 

judgment against a judgment debtor. The person or registered owner shall also be 

notified at that time that execution may be levied against his or her assets, liens may 

be placed against his or her property, his or her wages may be garnished, and other 

steps may be taken to  satisfy the judgment. The filing fee plus any costs of collection 

shall be added to the judgment amount. 

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the processing agency shall pay 

the established first paper civil filing fee, ifrequired by law, at the time an entry of 

civil judgment is requested. 

(e) If the registrfrtitm ef the  , ehiele has net been renewed for 60 days bey encl 

the rene,va] tlate, anti the netiee has net been eelleetetl by  the tlepartment purstrnnt te 

Seetien 4770, the prneessi1,g ageney  may  -ftle prnef ef lll1J'laitl penalties anti fees ·,oith 

the eettrt v.ith tl1e same effeet as a ei,iljudgment as pm ,itletl in subd-i,isien (b), exeept 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 165 

that ifthe amol:tflt ofthe UTiflaid penalties Md fees is not more th!ll'I fottr hundred dollars 

($400), the .filing fee shall be eolleetible by  the eot:t!t frnm the debtor . 

.(b). The issuing agency may contract with a collection agency to  collect unpaid 

toll evasion penalties, fees, and charges. 

(e) This seetion does not apply  to the registered m, ner of a  , ehiele if the toll 

e, asion , iolation oeern1 ed prior to the registered ovmer taking possession ofthe ·vehiele 

!ll'ld the department has noti.fied the prneessing ageney  pt1rst1!ll'lt to  Seetion 4774. 

SEC. 81.  Section 40268  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

40268.  The prneessing ageney  shall not .file a ehil judgment with the eotlft 

relating to a toll e, asion violation "hieh has been .filed  "ith the department unless the 

prneessing ageney  has determined that the registration of the vehiele has not been 

rene .. ed for 60 days beyond the rene11al date !ll'ld the notiee has not been eolleeted by 

the department pt1rst1!ll'lt to Seetion 4770. 

SEC.  82.  Section 40269 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40269.  (a) The processing agency shall terminate proceedings on the notice of 

a delinquent toll evasion violation in any  of the follo .. ing eases: 

(1) Upon reeeipt ofeolleeted penalties and adrninistrathe fees remitted by  the 

department lttlder Seetion 4772 for  that notiee of delinquent toll e, as ion , iolation. The 

termination under this stJbdi,ision is  by  satisfaetion of the toll e,asion penalty. 

(2) Ifthe notiee of delinctuent toll e, asion Yiolation v, as returned to the proeessing 

ageney  purstt!ll'lt to  Section 4774 Md .five years hiwe elapsed sinee the date ofthe 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 166 

, iehrtien. The terminatien tlflder this sttbdi·1isien is by the rnnning ef a statute ef 

limit!ltien ef preeeedings 

(3) The prneessing ageney  reeeives infurmatien,  .. hieh it shall verify  with the 

department, that the penalty  has been paid te the department pursu!lllt te Seetien 4772. 

t4J-If-if the registered owner of the vehicle provides proof to the processing 

agency that he or she was not the registered owner on the date of the toll evasion 

violation. 

(b) This section does not limit or impair the ability or the right of the processing 

agency to pursue the collection of delinquent toll evasion penalties from the person 

who was the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date of the alleged toll 

evasion violation. 

SEC. 83.  Section 40270 of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

40270.  If the ne',iee ef delinquent tell evasien  , ielatien is filed  "ith the 

department pttrstt!lflt te sttbdi, isien (b) ef Seetien 40267 !Ille! the department returns 

the netiee ef delinquent tell evasien  , ielation by  netiee ef neneelleetien pursuant te 

sttbdiyisien (b) ef Seetien 4770 er Seetien 4774, the prneessing ageney may e!lfleel 

the netiee ef delinqttent tell e, asien vielation. 

SEC. 84.  Section 40271  of the Vehicle Code is repealed. 

40271.  The time limitatim1 pm, ided by law  fur  eemmeneement efa ei, il aetien 

fur a , ielatien speeified in Seetien 40250 shall be telled from !Ille! after the date a netiee 

ef delinqttent tell e, asien violatien is filed "ith the department pursu!lflt te sub di, isien 

(b) ef Seetien 40267  tlfltil the netiee is rettlffled te the prneessing ageney  tlflder 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  167 

subdivisie,tt (b) e,f Seetie,n 4770, e,r Seetie,n 4772 e,r 4774, e,r is reett!led by the prneessittg 

ageney  ptt!sttflfttte,  subdi,isie,n (b) e,fSeetie,n 40255. 

SEC.  85.  Section 40508 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40508. 

(a) A person willfully violating his or her written promise to appear or 

a lawfully granted continuance of his or her promise to appear in court or before a 

person authorized to receive a deposit of bail is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of 

the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. 

(b) A person willfully failing to pay bail in installments as agreed to under Section 

40510.5 or a lawfully imposed fine for a violation of a provision of this code or a local 

ordinance adopted pursuant to this code within the time authorized by the court and 

without lawful excuse having been presented to the court on or before the date the bail 

or fine is due is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the full payment of the bail or 

fine after that time. 

(c) A person willfully failing to comply with a condition of a court order for a 

violation of this code, other than for failure to appear or failure to pay a fine, is guilty 

of a misdemeanor, regardless of his or her subsequent compliance with the order. 

(d) If a person eonvieted of flfl infrnetie,n fuils to pay  bail in installments as agreed 

te,  ttflder Seetie,n 40510. 5, or a tine or flfl installment thereof, within the time authorized 

by  the eottrt, the eomt may, exeept as otherwise prn,ided in this sttbdi,isie,n, impottnd 

the person's dri ,er 's lieense and order the person notto dri,e fur a perie,d notto eiceeed 

30 days. Before retttl'ttittg ~be lieense to ~be person, ~be  eottrt shall endorse on foe 

re, erse side e,f the lieettse that the person "as ordered not te, dri, e, the period for dhieh 

tha~ order v,as made, and ~be name ofthe eottrt making the order. Ifa defendant  .vith 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 168 

a elass C er M driver's lieense satisfies the eettrt that impettnding his er her drive1 's 

lieense and erdering the defendant net te dri, e "ill affeet his e1  he1  li, eliheed, the 

eettrt shall erder that the persen limit his er her driving fur a peried net te exeeed 30 

days te drrving that is essential in the eettrt's determinatien te the persen's empleyment, 

inelttding the persen's dri, ing te and frnm his er her plaee ef empleyment if ether 

means eftrnnspertatien are net reasenably ttV!lil!tble.  The eettrt shall pre,ide for the 

ende1sement efthe limitatien en the persen's lieense. The impettnding ef the lieense 

and mdering the persen net te dri,e er the (J!der limiting the pe1sen's dri,ing dees net 

eenstitttte a suspensien ef the lieense, but 1:1  vielatien efthe erde1  eenstitutes ernrternpt 

ef eettrt. 

SEC.  86.  Section 40509 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40509.  (a) Except as required under subdivision-Ee}Jhl of Section 40509.5, if 

any person has violated a written promise to appear or a lawfully granted continuance 

of his or her promise to appear in court or before the person authorized to receive a 

deposit of bail, or violated an order to appear in court, including, but not limited to, a 

written notice to appear issued in accordance with Section 40518, the magistrate or 

clerk of the court may give notice of the failure to appear to the department for any 

violation of this code, or any violation that can be heard by a juvenile traffic hearing 

referee pursuant to Section 256 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, or any violation 

of any other statute relating to the safe operation of a vehicle, except violations not 

required to be reported pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (6), and (7) of subdivision 

(b) of Section 1803. If thereafter the case in which the promise was given is adjudicated 

or the person who has violated the court order appears in  court or otherwise satisfies 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  169 

the order of the court, the magistrate or clerk of the court hearing the case shall sign 

and file with the department a certificate to  that effect. 

(b) If any  person has willfully  fitiled te pay a la,, fully  impesed fine vcithin the 

time attt!rnrized by the eotttt er te pay  a fine pursttant te subdivision (a) ef Seetien 

42003, the magistrate er elerk efthe eettrt may  gi, e netiee efthc fitet te the department 

fur any  , ielatien, C*eept  , ielatiens not rcqttired te be reported pttrsuant te paragraphs 

(!), (2), (3), (6), and (7) efsttbdi,isien (b) ef Seetien 1803. Ifthereafter the fine is 

fully  paid, the magistrate er  elcrk ef the ee ttrt shall issue and file  "ith the department 

a certificate sho" ing that the fine has been paid. 

(e) (1) Netwithstanding subdivisiens (a) and (b), the eeurt may  netify the 

department efthe total amottttt efbail, fines, assessments, and fees  attHrnrized or 

reqttired by  this eede, inelttding Scetien 40508.5,  whieh arc ttnpaid by  any  persen. 

(2) Onee a eettrt has established the amettnt ofbail, fines, assessmeIIts, and fees, 

and notified the departrnent, t!,e eeu, t shall net ft:tt ther  enhance or medify that ameU:ttt. 

(3) This sttbdi,ision applies enly  te •,ielations efthis code that de net ree[Uire  a 

mandatery eeurt appearance, are net eentested by  the defendant, and de not rce[Uire 

prnof of eerreetion certified by  the eettrt. 

(d) \Vit!1 respect te a  ,ielation efthis code, this section is applicable te any  eeurt 

which has not elected ',o be sttbjcct te the neticc requirements ofsttbdivision (b) of 

Section 40509.5 . 

.(hl Any violation subject to Section 40001, which is the responsibility of the 

owner of the vehicle, shall not be reported under this section. 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  170 

SEC. 87.  Section 40509.5 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

40509.5.  (a) Except as required under subdivision#,..ili). if, with respect to 

an offense described in subdivision ( e ), a person has violated his or her written promise 

to appear or a lawfully granted continuance of his or her promise to appear in court or 

before the person authorized to receive a deposit of bail, or violated an order to appear 

in court, including, but not limited to, a written notice to appear issued in accordance 

with Section 40518, the magistrate or clerk of the court may give notice of the failure 

to appear to the department for a violation of this code, a violation that can be heard 

by a juvenile traffic hearing referee pursuant to Section 256 of the Welfare and 

Institutions Code, or a violation of any other statute relating to the safe operation of a 

vehicle, except violations not required to be reported pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), 

(3), (6), and (7) of subdivision (b) of Section 1803. lfthereafterthe case in which the 

promise was given is adjudicated or the person who has violated the court order appears 

in court and satisfies the order of the court, the magistrate or clerk of the court hearing 

the case shall sign and file with the department a certificate to that effect. 

(b) If,  "ith respeet to fltl  offense deseribed ifl subdi, isicm  (e), a persofl has 

"illfully failed to P!l'.Y  a la" fully  imposed fifle, or bail ifl iflstallmeflts as agreed to t1flcler 

Seetiofl 40510.5, withifl the time attthorized by  the eotlft or to P!l'.Y  a fifle  pmst1fltlt to 

st1bdi,isiofl (a) of Seetiofl 42003, the magis~'!'ate or elerk of the eottrt m!l'.Y  gi,e notiee 

of the faet to the department for  a  , iolatiofl, exeept violatiofls not recjttired to be reported 

pttrst1aflt to paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (6), fltld  (7) of wbdivision (b) of Seetion 1803. If 

thereafter the fme  or bail is fully  paid, the magistrate or elerk of the eomt shall isst1e 

and file  "ith the department a eertifieate showing that the fine or bail has beef! paid. 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE 171 

.(12).  If a person charged with a violation of Section 23152 or 23153, or Section 

191.5 of the Penal Code, or subdivision (a) of Section 192.5 of that code has violated 

a lawfully granted continuance of his or her promise to appear in court or is released 

from custody on his or her own recognizance and fails to appear in court or before the 

person authorized to receive a deposit of bail, or violated an  order to appear in court, 

the magistrate or clerk of the court shall give notice to the department of the failure to 

appear. Ifthereafter the case in which the notice was given is adjudicated or the person 

who has violated the court order appears in court or otherwise satisfies the order ofthe 

court, the magistrate or clerk of the court hearing the case shall prepare and forward 

to the department a certificate to that effect. 

(0_ Except as required under subdivision-fet,fil the court shall mail a courtesy 

warning notice to the defendant by first-class mail at the address shown on the notice 

to appear, at least 10 days before sending a notice to the department under this section. 

@  Ifthe court notifies the department of a failure to appear or pay  a tine or bail 

pursuant to st!bclivision (a) or (b), subdivision (a), no arrest warrant shall be issued for 

an alleged violation of subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 40508, unless one of the 

following criteria is met: 

(1) The alleged underlying offense is a misdemeanor or felony. 

(2) The alleged underlying offense is a violation of any provision of Division 

12 ( commencing with Section 24000), Division 13 ( commencing with Section 29000), 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE 172 

or Division 15 (commencing with Section 35000), required to be reported pursuant to 

Section 1803. 

(3) The driver's record does not show that the defendant has a valid California 

driver's license. 

(4) The driver's record shows an unresolved charge that the defendant is in 

violation ofhis or her written promise to appear for one or more other alleged violations 

of the law. 

(cl Except as required under subdivision#,ihl, in addition to the proceedings 

described in this section, the court may elect to notify the department pursuant to 

subdivision (c) of Section 40509. 

(g) This seetion is applieable to eottrts that have eleeted to provide notiee purst1ant 

to sttbdi,ision (b). The method of eommeneing m  terminating an eleetion to prneeed 

t1nder this seetion shall be preseribed bj the department. 

ill A violation subject to  Section 40001, that is the responsibility of the owner 

of the vehicle, shall not be reported under this section. 

SEC.  88.  Section 42270 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 

42270.  (a) QlThe Department of Motor Vehicles and the Department of the 

California Highway Patrol each shall file, at least monthly with the Controller, a report 

of money received by the department covering all fees for applications accepted by 

the department and all other moneys received by the department under this code and, 

at the same time, shall remit all money so reported to the Treasurer.  On order of the 

05/21/17  10:10AM 
RN 17 09940  PAGE  173 

Controller, the Treasurer shall deposit in the Motor Vehicle Account in the State 

Transportation Fund, into which is merged the Motor Vehicle Account in the 

Transportation Tax Fund, all moneys so reported and remitted. 

(2) Any reference in any law or regulation to the Motor Vehicle Fund, or to the 

Motor Vehicle Account in the Transportation Tax Fund, shall be deemed to refer to 

the Motor Vehicle Account in the State Transportation Fund, which is created by 

subdivision (a)  of Section 42271. 

(b) The amount of any penalties collected by the department pursuant to Seetiens 

9553 and 9554 efthis eede and Sections 10770 and 10854 ofthe Revenue and Taxation 

Code shall, for purposes of subdivision (a), be deemed to be a percentage ofthe weight 

fee,  registration fee,  and vehicle license fee obtained when applying the total of these 

fees  collected, excluding use tax, against the individual weight fees, registration fees, 

and vehicle license fees collected on each application. Penalties which cannot be 

allocated in accordance with this subdivision shall be allocated according to subdivision 

(c). 

(c) The amount of any penalties collected by the department, as provided in 

Seetiens 9553  and 9554 ef~bis eede Md Sections 10770 and 10854 of the Revenue 

and Taxation Code which cannot be allocated in accordance with subdivision (b ), shall, 

for the purposes of subdivision (a), be deemed to be a percentage of the total fees 

allocated under this section and under Section 11001  of the Revenue and Taxation 

Code equal to that percentage of the ratio based on the fees previously allocated under 

this section and under Section 11001  of the Revenue and Taxation Code in the fiscal 

05/21/17  10:10 AM 
RN  17 09940  PAGE  174 

year preceding the calendar year for which the penalties are to be allocated. That ratio 

shall be reevaluated periodically and shall be adjusted to reflect any change in the fee 

structure that may be provided in this code or in Part 5 ( commencing with Section 

10701) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

(d) Whenever any fee paid to the department has not been allocated within one 

year of the date of collection, the fee  shall be allocated to the Motor Vehicle License 

Fee Account in the Transportation Tax Fund, and the Motor Vehicle Account and the 

State Highway Account in the State Transportation Fund, in proportion to the revenue 

allocated to those accounts by the department in the previous fiscal year. 

SEC. 89.  This measure shall be broadly construed to accomplish its purposes. 

The provisions ofthis measure may be amended by a vote of 55 percent ofthe members 

of each house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor so  long as  such 

amendments are consistent with and further the intent of the measure. 

- 0 -

