1 7  - 0  0  1 2 Arndt.#  1 

CALIFORNIA  ASSOCIATION  OF  REALTORS® 

August 9,  2017 

Ashley Johansson,  Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 17th  Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

RECEIVED 

AUG  1 0 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 

People's Initiative to  Protect Proposition  13 Savings, Version 2 (17-0012) 

Dear Ms.  Johansson: 

When we met with representatives of the  Legislative Analyst's Office to discuss the 
fiscal analysis of the initiative that has been  submitted  by the California Association of 
REAL TORS®, they identified an error in the  initiative as drafted by Legislative Counsel. 

The initiative specifies the method for calculating the base year value of the 
replacement property if the full cash value of the replacement property is equal to or 
less than the full  cash value of the original property.  The formula erroneously refers to 
"replacement" property when  it should  have  referred  to  "original" property.  The 
enclosed  copy of Version 2 has been  corrected;  the correction  is  highlighted in yellow. 

I respectfully request that the Attorney General prepare a title and summary for the 
amended  language. 

If you  have any questions, please contact Christopher C.  Carlisle,  1121  L Street, Suite 
600, Sacramento, CA 95814; (916) 492-5200. 

r/11/~~;/

Alexand  r E.  Creel 

Senior Vice-President Governmental Affairs 


Enclosure 

m  REALTOR®- is a registered  mark which identifies• professionil in 
LJ3 
··~uoii"  NATIONAL ASSOCIATION or REALTORS® 

real  esi.te who mb,cnbe, to a strict Code of Ethics  a, a mcm!J.CT of the 

1121 L Street, Suite 600, Sacramento, CA 95814  Tel  (916) 492-5200  Fax (916) 444-1794  www.car.org 

1  7  - 0  0  1 2  Arndt.#  I 

VERSION 2; with amendments 


SECTION l. This act shall be !mown, and shall be cited, as the People's Initiative to 


Protect Proposition 13  Savings. 


SECTION 2.  Section 2 of Article XIII A of the State Constitution is  amended to read: 


SEC. 2. (a) (1)The "full cash value" means the county assessor's valuation 

of real property as shown on the  1975-76 tax bill under "full cash value" or, 

thereafter, the appraised value of real property when purchased, newly constructed, 

or a change in ownership has occurred after the 1975 assessment. All real property 

not already assessed up to the 1975-76 full cash value may be reassessed to reflect 

that valuation. For purposes of this section, "newly constructed" does not include 

real property that is reconstructed after a disaster, as declared by the Governor, 

where the fair market value of the real property, as reconstructed, is comparable 

to its fair market value prior to the disaster. For purposes of this section, the term 

"newly constructed" does not include that portion of an existing structure that 

consists of the construction or reconstruction of seismic retrofitting components, 

as defined by the Legislature. 

However, the 

(2) On and after November 5,  1986, and until January 1, 2019, the 

Legislature may provide that, under appropriate circumstances and pursuant to 

definitions and procedures established by the Legislature, any person over the age 

of 55  years who resides in property that is eligible for the homeowner's exemption 

under subdivision (k) of Section 3 of Article XIII and any implementing legislation 

may transfer the base year value of the property entitled to exemption, with the 

adjustments authorized by subdivision (b ), to any replacement dwelling of equal 

or lesser value located within the same county and purchased or newly constructed 

by that person as his or her principal residence within two years of the sale of the 

original property. For 

(3) (A) For purposes of this section, "atly the following definitions shall 

apply: 

(i) "Any person over the age of 55  years" includes a married couple one 

member of which is over the age of 55 years. For purposes  of this seetion, 

"replacement 

(ii) "Replacement dwelling" means a building, structure, or other shelter 

constituting a place of abode, whether real property or personal property, and any 

land on which it may be situated. For purposes of this section, a two-dwelling unit 

shall be considered as two separate single-family dwellings. This 

(B) This paragraph shall apply to any replacement dwelling that was 

purchased or newly constructed on or after November 5,  1986. 

In addition, the 

(4) On and after November 9,  1988, and until January I, 2019, the 

Legislature may authorize each county board of supervisors, after consultation 

with the local affected agencies within the county's boundaries, to adopt an 

ordinance making the provisions of this subdivision relating to transfer of base 

year value also applicable to situations in which the replacement dwellings are 

located in that county and the original properties are located in another county 

within this State. For purposes of this paragraph, "local affected agency" means 

any city, special district, school district, or community college district that receives 

an annual property tax revenue allocation. This paragraph applies to any 

replacement dwelling that was purchased or newly constructed on or after the date 

the county adopted the provisions of this subdivision relating to transfer of base 

year value, but does not apply to any replacement dwelling that was purchased or 

newly constructed before November 9,  1988. 

The 

(5) On and after June 6,  1990, and until January 1, 2019, the Legislature 

may extend the provisions of this subdivision relating to the transfer of base year 

values from original properties to replacement dwellings of homeowners over the 

age of 55 years to severely disabled homeowners, but only with respect to those 

replacement dwellings purchased or newly constructed on or after the effective 

date of this paragraph. 

(6) (A) On and after January 1, 2019, subject to applicable procedures and 

definitions as provided by statute, the base year value of property that is eligible 

for the homeowner's exemption under subdivision (k) of Section 3 of Article XIII 

of any person, regardless of age or disability, shall be transferred to any replacement 

dwelling, regardless of the number of prior transfers. the value of the replacement 

dwelling, that is located within the same county and is purchased or newly constructed by 

that person as his or her principal residence within two years of the sale of the original 

property. 

(B) For purposes of this paragraph. the following shall apply: 

(i) For any replacement dwelling of greater value and purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property. the base year value of the replacement dwelling shall be calculated by 

adding the difference between the full cash value of the original property and the 

full cash value of the replacement dwelling to the base year value of the original 

property. 

(ii) For any replacement dwelling of equal or lesser value purchased or 

newly constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her 

original property, the base year value of the replacement dwelling shall be 

calculated by dividing the base year value of the original property by the full cash 

value of the original property, and multiplying the result by the full cash value 

of the replacement dwelling. 

(C) A county board of supervisors may, in the same manner as provided in 

paragraph (4), adopt an ordinance making the provisions of this paragraph 

applicable in situations in which the replacement dwelling is located in that county 

and the original property is located in another county. 

(b) The full cash value base may reflect from year to year the inflationary 

rate not to exceed 2 percent for any given year or reduction as shown in the 

consumer price index or comparable data for the area under taxing jurisdiction, 

or may be reduced to reflect substantial damage, destruction, or other factors 

causing a decline in value. 

(c) For purposes of subdivision ( a), the Legislature may provide that the 

term "newly constructed" does not include any of the following: 

(1) The construction or addition of any active solar energy system. 

(2) The construction or installation of any fire  sprinkler system, other fire 

extinguishing system, fire detection system, or fire-related egress improvement, 

as defmed by the Legislature, that is constructed or installed after the effective 

date of this paragraph. 

(3) The construction, installation, or modification on or after the effective 

date of this paragraph of any portion or structural component of a single- or 

multiple-family dwelling that is eligible for the homeowner's exemption if the 

construction, installation, or modification is for the purpose of making the dwelling 

more accessible to a severely disabled person. 

(4) The construction, installation, removal, or modification on or after the 

effective date of this paragraph of any portion or structural component of an 

existing building or structure if the construction, installation, removal, or 

modification is for the purpose of making the building more accessible to, or more 

usable by, a disabled person. 

(d) For purposes of this section, the term "change in ownership" does not 

include the acquisition of real property as a replacement for comparable property 

if the person acquiring the real property has been displaced from the property 

replaced by eminent domain proceedings, by acquisition by a public entity, or 

governmental action that has resulted in a judgment of inverse condemnation. The 

real property acquired shall be deemed comparable to the property replaced if it 

is similar in size, utility, and function, or if it conforms to state regulations defined 

by the Legislature governing the relocation of persons displaced by governmental 

actions. This subdivision applies to any property acquired after March 1,  1975, 

but affects only those assessments of that property that occur after the provisions 

of this subdivision take effect. 

(e) (1) (A)Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the 

Legislature shall provide that the base year value of property that is substantially 

damaged or destroyed by a disaster, as  declared by the Governor, may be 

transferred to comparable property within the same county that is acquired or 

newly constructed as a replacement for the substantially damaged or destroyed 

property. 

(2) 
(B) Except as provided in paragraph (3), subparagraph (C), this subdivision 

paragraph applies to any comparable replacement property acquired or newly 

constructed on or after July I, 1985, until January 1, 2019, and to the determination 

of base year values for the 1985-86 fiscal year and fiscal years thereafter, until 

the 2018-19 fiscal year. 

(3) 
(C)(i)In addition to the transfer of base year value of property within the 
same county that is permitted by paragraph (1), subparagraph (A), the Legislature 

may authorize each county board of supervisors to adopt, after consultation with 

affected local agencies within the county, an ordinance allowing the transfer of 

the base year value of property that is located within another county in the State 

and is substantially damaged or destroyed by a disaster, as declared by the 

Governor, to comparable replacement property of equal or lesser value that is 

located within the adopting county and is  acquired or newly constructed within 

three years of the substantial damage or destruction of the original property as a 

replacement for that property. The scope and amount of the benefit provided to a 

property owner by the transfer of base year value of property pursuant to this 

paragraph shall not exceed the scope and amount of the benefit provided to a 

property owner by the transfer of base year value of property pursuant to 

subdivision (a). For purposes of this paragraph, subparagraph, "affected local 

agency" means any city, special district, school district, or community college 

district that receives an annual allocation of ad valorem property tax revenues. 

This paragraph 

(ii) This subparagraph applies to any comparable replacement property that 

is acquired or newly constructed as a replacement for property substantially 

damaged or destroyed by a disaster, as declared by the Governor, occurring on or 

after October 20, 1991, and before January 1, 2019, and to the detennination of 

base year values for the 1991-92 fiscal year and fiscal years thereafter. until the 

2018-19 fiscal year. 

(2) (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, on and after 
January 1,2019, the base year value of property that is substantially damaged or 
destroyed by a disaster, as declared by the Governor, shall be transferred to any 

property within the same county that is acquired or newly constructed as a 

replacement for the substantially damaged or destroyed property, regardless of 

whether that replacement property is comparable, as specified in paragraph (2) of 

subdivision (f). 

(B) For purposes of this paragraph, the following shall apply: 

(i) For any replacement property of greater value and purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property, the base year value of the replacement property shall be calculated by 

adding the difference between the full cash value of the original property and the 

full cash value of the replacement property to the base year value of the original 

property. 

(ii) For any replacement property of equal or lesser value purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property, the base year value of the replacement property shall be calculated by 

dividing the base year value of the original property by the full cash value of the 

original property, and multiplying the result by the full cash value of the 

replacement property. 

(C) A county board of supervisors may, in the same manner as provided in 

subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1), adopt an ordinance making the provisions of 

this paragraph applicable to situations in which the replacement property is located 

in that county and the original property is located in another county. 

(f) For the purposes of subdivision (e): 

(1) Property is substantially damaged or destroyed if it sustains physical 

damage amounting to more than 50 percent of its value immediately before the 

disaster. Damage includes a diminution in the value of property as  a result of 

restricted access caused by the disaster. 

(2) Replacement property is comparable to the property substantially 

damaged or destroyed if it is  similar in size, utility, and function to the property 

that it replaces, and if the fair market value of the acquired property is comparable 

to the fair market value of the replaced property prior to the disaster. 

(g) For purposes of subdivision (a), the terms "purchased" and "change in 

ownership" do not include the purchase or transfer of real property between spouses 

since March 1,  1975, including, but not limited to, all of the following: 

(1) Transfers to a trustee for the beneficial use of a spouse, or the surviving 

spouse of a deceased transferor, or by a trustee of such a trust to the spouse of the 

trustor. 

(2) Transfers to a spouse that take effect upon the death of a spouse. 

(3) Transfers to a spouse or former spouse in connection with a property 

settlement agreement or decree of dissolution of a marriage or legal separation. 

(4) The creation, transfer, or tem1ination, solely between spouses, of any 

coowner's interest. 

(5) The distribution ofa legal entity's property to a spouse or former spouse 

in exchange for the interest of the spouse in the legal entity in connection with a 

property settlement agreement or a decree of dissolution of a marriage or legal 

separation. 

(h) (1) For purposes of subdivision (a), the terms "purchased" and "change 

in ownership" do not include the purchase or transfer of the principal residence 

of the transferor in the case of a purchase or transfer between parents and their 

children, as defined by the Legislature, and the purchase or transfer of the first 

one million dollars ($1,000,000) of the full cash value of all other real property 

between parents and their children, as  defined by the Legislature. This subdivision 

applies to both voluntary transfers and transfers resulting from a court order or 

judicial decree. 

(2) (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), commencing with purchases or transfers 

that occur on or after the date upon which the measure adding this paragraph 

becomes effective, the exclusion established by paragraph (I) also applies to a 

purchase or transfer of real property between grandparents and their grandchild 

or grandchildren, as defined by the Legislature, that otherwise qualifies under 

paragraph (1), if all of the parents of that grandchild or those grandchildren, who 

qualify as the children of the grandparents, are deceased as  of the date of the 

purchase or transfer. 

(B) A purchase or transfer of a principal residence shall not be excluded 

pursuant to subparagraph (A) if the transferee grandchild or grandchildren also 

received a principal residence, or interest therein, through another purchase or 

transfer that was excludable pursuant to paragraph (1 ). The full cash value of any 

real property, other than a principal residence, that was transferred to the grandchild 

or grandchildren pursuant to a purchase or transfer that was excludable pursuant 

to paragraph (1 ), and the full cash value of a principal residence that fails to qualify 

for exclusion as  a result of the preceding sentence, shall be included in applying, 

for purposes of subparagraph (A), the one-million-dollar ($1,000,000) full cash 

value limit specified in paragraph (1 ). 

(i) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, except as 

otherwise provided in paragraph (5), the Legislature shall provide with respect to 

a qualified contaminated property, as defined in paragraph (2), that either, but not 

both, of the following apply: 

(A) (i) Subject to the limitation of clause (ii), on and after November 4, 

1998, and until January 1,2019, the base year value of the qualified contaminated 
property, as  adjusted as authorized by subdivision (b ), may be transferred to a 

replacement property that is  acquired or newly constructed as a replacement for 

the qualified contaminated property, if the replacement real property has a fair 

market value that is equal to or less than the fair market value of the qualified 

contaminated property if that property were not contaminated and, except as 

otherwise provided by this clause, is located within the same county. The base 

year value of the qualified contaminated property may be transferred to a 

replacement real property located within another county if the board of supervisors 

of that other county has, after consultation with the affected local agencies within 

that county, adopted a resolution authorizing an intercounty transfer of base year 

value as so described. 

(ii) This subparagraph applies only to replacement property that is acquired 

or newly constructed within five years after ownership in the qualified contaminated 

property is sold or otherwise transferred. 

(B) In the case in which the remediation of the environmental problems on 

the qualified contaminated property requires the destruction of, or results in 

substantial damage to, a structure located on that property, the term "new 

construction" does not include the repair of a substantially damaged structure, or 

the construction of a structure replacing a destroyed structure on the qualified 

contaminated property, performed after the remediation of the environmental 

problems on that property, provided that the repaired or replacement structure is 

similar in size, utility, and function to the original structure. 

(2) For purposes of this subdivision, "qualified contaminated property" 

means residential or nonresidential real property that is all of the following: 

(A) In the case of residential real property, rendered uninhabitable, and in 

the case of nonresidential real property, rendered unusable, as the result of either 

environmental problems, in the nature of and including, but not limited to, the 

presence of toxic or hazardous materials, or the remediation of those environmental 

problems, except where the existence of the environmental problems was known 

to the owner, or to a related individual or entity as described in paragraph (3), at 

the time the real property was acquired or constructed. For purposes of this 

subparagraph, residential real property is "uninhabitable" if that property, as a 

result of health hazards caused by or associated with the environmental problems, 

is unfit for human habitation, and nonresidential real property is "unusable" if that 

property, as a result of health hazards caused by or associated with the 

enviromnental problems, is unhealthy and unsuitable for occupancy. 

(B) Located on a site that has been designated as a toxic or environmental 

hazard or as  an environmental cleanup site by an agency of the State of California 

or the federal government. 

(C) Real property that contains a structure or structures thereon prior to the 

completion of enviromnental cleanup activities, and that structure or structures 

are substantially damaged or destroyed as a result of those environmental cleanup 

activities. 

(D)  Stipulated by the lead governmental agency, with respect to the 

enviromnental problems or environmental cleanup of the real property, not to have 

been rendered uninhabitable or unusable, as applicable, as  described in 

subparagraph (A), by any act or omission in which an owner of that real property 

participated or acquiesced. 

(3) It shall be rebuttably presumed that an owner of the real property 

participated or acquiesced in any act or omission that rendered the real property 

uninhabitable or unusable, as applicable, if that owner is related to any individual 

or entity that committed that act or omission in any of the following ways: 

(A) Is  a spouse, parent, child, grandparent, grandchild, or sibling of that 

individual. 

(B) Is a corporate parent, subsidiary, or affiliate of that entity. 

(C) Is  an owner of, or has control of, that entity. 

(D) Is owned or controlled by that entity. 

If this presumption is not overcome, the owner shall not receive the relief 

provided for in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1).  The presumption may 

be overcome by presentation of satisfactory evidence to the assessor, who shall 

not be bound by the findings of the lead governmental agency in determining 

whether the presumption has been overcome. 

(4) This subdivision applies only to replacement property that is acquired 

or constructed on or after January 1,  1995, and to property repairs performed on 

or after that date. 

(5) (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, on and after 

January 1, 2019, and subject to the limitation of clause (ii) of subparagraph (A) 

of paragraph (1), the base year value of the qualified contaminated property shall 

be transferred to a replacement property that is acquired or newly constructed as 

a replacement for the qualified contaminated property, regardless of whether the 

replacement real property has a fair market value that is equal to or less than the 

fair market value of the qualified contaminated property if that property were not 

contaminated, that is  located within the same county. 

(B) For purposes of this paragraph, the following shall apply: 

(i) For any replacement property of greater value and purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property pursuant to this clause, the base year value of the replacement property 

shall be calculated by adding the difference between the full cash value of the 

original property and the full cash value of the replacement property to the base 

year value of the original property. 

(ii) For any replacement property of equal or lesser value purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property pursuant to this clause, the base year value of the replacement property 

shall be calculated by dividing the base year value of the original property by the 

full cash value of the original property, and multiplying the result by the full 

cash value of the replacement property. 

(iii) A county board of supervisors may, in the same manner as provided in 

clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1), adopt an ordinance making the 

provisions of this paragraph applicable to situations in which the replacement 

property is located in that county and the original property is located in another 

county. 

(j)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, amendments to this section 

adopted prior to November 1,  1988, are effective for changes in ownership that 

occur, and new construction that is completed, after the effective date of the 

amendment. Unless specifically provided otherwise, amendments to this section 

adopted after November 1,  1988, are effective for changes in ownership that occur, 

and new construction that is completed, on or after the effective date of the 

amendment. 

SECTION 3.  Section 69.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 

69.5. (a) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, pursuant to subdivision 

(a) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California Constitution, any person over the 

age of 55 years, or any severely and pennanently disabled person, who resides in 

property that is eligible for the homeowners' exemption under subdivision (k) of Section 

3 of Article XIII of the California Constitution and Section 218 may transfer, subject 

to the conditions and limitations provided in this section, the base year value of that 

property to any replacement dwelling of equal or lesser value that is located within the 

same county and is purchased or newly constructed by that person as his or her principal 

residence within two years of the sale by that person of the original property, provided 

that the base year value of the original property shall not be transferred to the 

replacement dwelling until the original property is sold. 

(2) Notwithstanding the limitation in paragraph (1) requiring that the original 

property and the replacement dwelling be located in the same county, this limitation 

shall not apply in any county in which the county board of supervisors, after consultation 

with local affected agencies within the boundaries of the county, adopts an ordinance 

making the provisions of paragraph (1) also applicable to situations in which 

replacement dwellings are located in that county and the original properties are located 

in another county within this state. The authorization contained in this paragraph shall 

be applicable in a county only if the ordinance adopted by the board of supervisors 

complies with all of the following requirements: 

(A) It is adopted only after consultation between the board of supervisors and 

all other local affected agencies within the county's boundaries. 

(B) It requires that all claims for transfers of base year value from original 

property located in another county be granted if the claims meet the applicable 

requirements of both subdivision (a) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California 

Constitution and this section. 

(C) It requires that all base year valuations of original property located in another 

county and determined by its assessor be accepted in connection with the granting of 

claims for transfers of base year value. 

(D) It provides that its provisions are operative for a period of not less than five 

years. 

(E) The ordinance specifies the date on and after which its provisions shall be 

applicable. However, the date specified shall not be earlier than November 9, 1988. 

The specified applicable date may be a date earlier than the date the county adopts the 

ordinance. 

(b) In addition to meeting the requirements of subdivision (a), any person claiming· 

the property tax relief provided by this section shall be eligible for that relief only if 

the following conditions are met: 

(1) The claimant is an owner and a resident of the original property either at the 

time of its sale, or at the time when the original property was substantially damaged 

or destroyed by misfortune or calamity, or within two years of the purchase or new 

construction of the replacement dwelling. 

(2) The original property is  eligible for the homeowners' exemption, as the result 

of the claimant's ownership and occupation of the property as his or her principal 

residence, either at the time of its sale, or at the time when the original property was 

substantially damaged or destroyed by misfortune or calamity, or within two years of 

the purchase or new construction of the replacement dwelling. 

(3) At the time of the sale of the original property, the claimant or the claimant's 

spouse who resides with the claimant is at least 55 years of age, or is severely and 

permanently disabled. 

(4) At the time of claiming the property tax relief provided by subdivision (a), 

the claimant is an owner of a replacement dwelling and occupies it as his or her principal 

place of residence and, as a result thereof, the property is currently eligible for the 

homeowners' exemption or would be eligible for the exemption except that the property 

is  already receiving the exemption because of an exemption claim filed by the previous 

owner. 

(5) The original property of the claimant is sold by him or her within two years 

of the purchase or new construction of the replacement dwelling. For purposes of this 

paragraph, the purchase or new construction of the replacement dwelling includes the 

purchase of that portion of land on which the replacement building, structure, or other 

shelter constituting a place of abode of the claimant will be situated and that, pursuant 

to paragraph (3) of subdivision (g), constitutes a part of the replacement dwelling. 

(6) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2) of subdivision (a), the 

replacement dwelling, including that portion of land on which it is situated that is 

specified in paragraph (5), is located entirely within the same county as the claimant's 

original property. 

(7) The claimant has not previously been granted, as a claimant, the property 

tax relief provided by this section, except that this paragraph shall not apply to any 

person who becomes severely and permanently disabled subsequent to being granted, 

as a claimant, the property tax relief provided by this section for any person over the 

age of 55 years. In order to prevent duplication of claims under this section within this 

state, county assessors shall report quarterly to the State Board of Equalization that 

information from claims filed in accordance with subdivision (f) and from county 

records as is specified by the board necessary to identify fully all claims under this 

section allowed by assessors and all claimants who have thereby received relief. The 

board may specify that the information include all or a part of the names and social 

security numbers of claimants and their spouses and the identity and location of the 

replacement dwelling to which the claim applies. The information may be required in 

the form of data processing media or other media and in a format that is  compatible 

with the recordkeeping processes of the counties and the auditing procedures of the 

state. 

(c) The property tax relief provided by this section shall be available if the original 

property or the replacement dwelling, or both, of the claimant includes, but is not 

limited to, either of the following: 

(1) A unit or lot within a cooperative housing corporation, a cmmnunity apartment 

project, a condominium project, or a planned unit development. Ifthe unit or lot 

constitutes the original property of the claimant, the assessor shall transfer to the 

claimant's replacement dwelling only the base year value of the claimant's unit or lot 

and his or her share in any common area reserved as an appurtenance of that unit or 

lot. If the unit or lot constitutes the replacement dwelling of the claimant, the assessor 

shall transfer the base year value of the claimant's original property only to the unit or 

lot of the claimant and any share of the claimant in any common area reserved as an 

appurtenance of that unit or lot. 

(2) A manufactured home or a manufactured home and any land owned by the 

claimant on which the manufactured home is  situated. For purposes of this paragraph, 

"land owned by the claimant" includes a pro rata interest in a resident-owned 

mobilehome park that is assessed pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 62.1. 

(A) If the manufactured home or the manufactured home and the land on which 

it is situated constitutes the claimant's original property, the assessor shall transfer to 

the claimant's replacement dwelling either the base year value of the manufactured 

home or the base year value of the manufactured home and the land on which it is 

situated, as appropriate. If the manufactured home dwelling that constitutes the original 

property of the claimant includes an interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park, 

the assessor shall transfer to the claimant's replacement dwelling the base year value 

of the claimant's manufactured home and his or her pro rata portion of the real property 

of the park. No transfer of base year value shall be made by the assessor of that portion 

of land that does not constitute a part of the original property, as provided in paragraph 

(4) of subdivision (g). 

(B) If the manufactured home or the manufactured home and the land on which 

it is situated constitutes the claimant's replacement dwelling, the assessor shall transfer 

the base year value of the claimant's original property either to the manufactured home 

or the manufactured home and the land on which it is situated, as  appropriate. If the 

manufactured home dwelling that constitutes the replacement dwelling of the claimant 

includes an interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park, the assessor shall transfer 

the base year value of the claimant's original property to the manufactured home of 

the claimant and his or her pro rata portion of the park. No transfer of base year value 

shall be made by the assessor to that portion of land that does not constitute a part of 

the replacement dwelling, as provided in paragraph (3) of subdivision (g). 

This subdivision shall be subject to the limitations specified in subdivision (d). 

(d) The property tax relief provided by this section shall be available to a claimant 

who is the coowner of the original property, as  a joint tenant, a tenant in common, a 

community property owner, or a present beneficiary of a trust subject to the following 

limitations: 

(1) If a single replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed by all of 

the coowners and each coowner retains an interest in the replacement dwelling, the 

claimant shall be eligible under this section whether or not any or all of the remaining 

coowners would otherwise be eligible claimants. 

(2) If two or more replacement dwellings are separately purchased or newly 

constructed by two or more coowners and more than one coowner would otherwise be 

an eligible claimant, only one coowner shall be eligible under this section. These 

coowners shall determine by mutual agreement which one of them shall be deemed 

eligible. 

(3) If two or more replacement dwellings are separately purchased or newly 

constructed by two coowners who held the original property as  community property, 

only the coowner who has attained the age of 55 years, or is severely and permanently 

disabled, shall be eligible under this section. Ifboth spouses are over 55  years of age, 

they shall detennine by mutual agreement which one of them is eligible. 

In the case of coowners whose original property is a multiunit dwelling, the 

limitations imposed by paragraphs (2) and (3)  shall only apply to coowners who 

occupied the same dwelling unit within the original property at the time specified in 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (b). 

(e) Upon the sale of original property, the assessor shall determine a new base 

year value for that property in accordance with subdivision (a) of Section 2 of Article 

XIII A of the California Constitution and Section 110.1, whether or not a replacement 

dwelling is subsequently purchased or newly constructed by the fonner owner or owners 

of the original property. 

This section shall not apply unless the transfer of the original property is a change 

in ownership that either (1) subjects that property to reappraisal at its current fair market 

value in accordance with Section 110.1  or 5803  or (2) results in a base year value 

determined in accordance with this section, Section 69, or Section 69 .3 because the 

property qualifies under this section, Section 69, or Section 69.3  as  a replacement 

dwelling or property. 

(t) (1) A claimant shall not be eligible for the property tax relief provided by 

this section unless the claimant provides to the assessor, on a form that shall be designed 

by the State Board of Equalization and that the assessor shall make available upon 

request, the following information: 

(A) The name and social security number of each claimant and of any spouse 

of the claimant who is a record owner of the replacement dwelling. 

(B) Proof that the claimant or the claimant's spouse who resided on the original 

property with the claimant was, at the time of its sale, at least 55 years of age, or 

severely and permanently disabled. Proof of severe and permanent disability shall be 

considered a certification, signed by a licensed physician and surgeon of appropriate 

specialty, attesting to the claimant's severely and permanently disabled condition. In 

the absence of available proof that a person is over 55  years of age, the claimant shall 

certify under penalty of perjury that the age requirement is met. In the case of a severely 

and permanently disabled claimant either of the following shall be submitted: 

(i) A certification, signed by a licensed physician or surgeon of appropriate 

specialty that identifies specific reasons why the disability necessitates a move to the 

replacement dwelling and the disability-related requirements, including any locational 

requirements, of a replacement dwelling. The claimant shall substantiate that the 

replacement dwelling meets disability-related requirements so identified and that the 

primary reason for the move to the replacement dwelling is to satisfy those requirements. 

If the claimant, or the claimant's spouse or guardian, so declares under penalty of 

perjury, it shall be rebuttably presmned that the primary purpose of the move to the 

replacement dwelling is to satisfy identified disability-related requirements. 

(ii) The claimant's substantiation that the primary purpose of the move to the 

replacement dwelling is to alleviate financial burdens. caused by the disability. If the 

claimant, or the claimant's spouse or guardian, so declares under penalty ofperjury, 

it shall be rebuttably presmned that the primary purpose of the move is to alleviate the 

financial burdens caused by the disability. 

(C) The address and, if known, the assessor's parcel number of the original 

property. 

(D) The date of the claimant's sale ofthe original property and the date of the 

claimant's purchase or new construction of a replacement dwelling. 

(E) A statement by the claimant that he or she occupied the replacement dwelling 

as his or her principal place of residence on the date of the filing of his or her claim. 

(F) Any claim under this section shall be filed within three years of the date the 

replacement dwelling was purchased or the new construction of the replacement 

dwelling was completed subject to subdivision (k) or (m). 

(2) A claim for transfer of base year value under this section that is  filed after 

the expiration of the filing period set forth in subparagraph (F) of paragraph (1) shall 

be considered by the assessor, subject to all of the following conditions: 

(A) Any base year value transfer granted pursuant to that claim shall apply 

commencing with the lien date of the assessment year in which the claim is filed. 

(B) The full cash value of the replacement property in the assessment year 

described in subparagraph (A) shall be the base year value of the real property in the 

assessment year in which the base year value was transferred, factored to the assessment 

year described in subparagraph (A) for both of the following: 

(i) Inflation as annually determined in accordance with paragraph (1) of 

subdivision (a) of Section 51. 

(ii) Any subsequent new construction occurring with respect to the subject real 

property that does not qualify for property tax relief pursuant to the criteria set forth 

in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph ( 4)  of subdivision (h). 

(g) For purposes of this section: 

(1) "Person over the age of 55 years" means any person or the spouse of any 

person who has attained the age of 55 years or older at the time of the sale of the original 

property. 

(2) "Base year value of the original property" means its base year value, as 

determined in accordance with Section 110.1, with the adjustments permitted by 

subdivision (b) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California Constitution and 

subdivision ( f)  of Section 110 .1, determined as of the date immediately prior to the 

date that the original property is  sold by the claimant, or in the case where the original 

property has been substantially damaged or destroyed by misfortune or calamity and 

the owner does not rebuild on the original property, determined as  of the date 

immediately prior to the misfortune or calamity. 

If the replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed after the transfer 

of the original property, "base year value of the original property" also includes any 

inflation factor adjustments permitted by subdivision (f) of Section 110.1  for the period 

subsequent to the sale of the original property. The base year or years used to compute 

the "base year value of the original property" shall be deemed to be the base year or 

years of any property to which that base year value is transferred pursuant to this 

section. 

(3) "Replacement dwelling" means a building, structure, or other shelter 

constituting a place of abode, whether real property or personal property, that is owned 

and occupied by a claimant as his or her principal place of residence, and any land 

owned by the claimant on which the building, structure, or other shelter is situated. 

For purposes of this paragraph, land constituting a part of a replacement dwelling 

includes only that area of reasonable size that is used as a site for a residence, and "land 

owned by the claimant" includes land for which the claimant either holds a leasehold 

interest described in subdivision ( c) of Section 61  or a land purchase contract. Each 

unit of a multiunit dwelling shall be considered a separate replacement dwelling. For 

purposes of this paragraph, "area of reasonable size that is used as a site for a residence" 

includes all land if any nomesidential uses of the property are only incidental to the 

use of the property as a residential site. For purposes of this paragraph, "land owned 

by the claimant" includes an ownership interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park 

that is assessed pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 62.1. 

(4) "Original property" means a building, structure, or other shelter constituting 

a place of abode, whether real property or personal property, that is owned and occupied 

by a claimant as his or her principal place of residence, and any land owned by the 

claimant on which the building, structure, or other shelter is situated. For purposes of 

this paragraph, land constituting a part of the original property includes only that area 

of reasonable size that is used as  a site for a residence, and "land owned by the claimant" 

includes land for which the claimant either holds a leasehold interest described in 

subdivision ( c) of Section 61  or a land purchase contract. Each unit of a multiunit 

dwelling shall be considered a separate original property. For purposes of this paragraph, 

"area of reasonable size that is used as a site for a residence" includes all land if any 

nonresidential uses of the property are only incidental to the use of the property as a 

residential site. For purposes of this paragraph, "land owned by the claimant" includes 

an ownership interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park that is assessed pursuant 

to subdivision (b) of Section 62.1. 

(5) "Equal or lesser value" means that the amount of the full cash value of a 

replacement dwelling does not exceed one of the following: 

(A) One hundred percent of the amount of the full cash value of the original 

property if the replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed prior to the 

date of the sale of the original property. 

(B) One hundred and five percent of the amount of the full cash value of the 

original property if the replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed within 

the first year following the date of the sale of the original property. 

(C) One hundred and ten percent of the amount of the full cash value of the 

original property if the replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed within 

the second year following the date of the sale of the original property. 

For the purposes of this paragraph, except as otherwise provided in paragraph 

(4) of subdivision (h), if the replacement dwelling is, in part, purchased and, in part, 

newly constructed, the date the "replacement dwelling is purchased or newly 

constructed" is the date ofpurchase or the date of completion of construction, whichever 

is later. 

(6) "Full cash value of the replacement dwelling" means its full cash value, 

determined in accordance with Section 110.1, as of the date on which it was purchased 

or new construction was completed, and after the purchase or the completion of new 

construction. 

(7) "Full cash value of the original property" means, either: 

(A) Its new base year value, determined in accordance with subdivision (e), 

without the application of subdivision (h)  of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California 

Constitution, plus the adjustments permitted by subdivision (b) of Section 2 of Article 

XIII A and subdivision (f) of Section 110.1  for the period from the date of its sale by 

the claimant to the date on which the replacement property was purchased or new 

construction was completed. 

(B) In the case where the original property has been substantially damaged or 

destroyed by misfortune or calamity and the owner does not rebuild on the original 

property, its full cash value, as determined in accordance with Section 110, immediately 

prior to its substantial damage or destruction by misfortune or calamity, as determined 

by the county assessor of the county in which the property is located, without the 

application of subdivision (h) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California 

Constitution, plus the adjustments permitted by subdivision (b)  of Section 2 of Article 

XIII A of the California Constitution and subdivision ( f)  of Section 110 .1,  for the period 

from the date of its sale by the claimant to the date on which the replacement property 

was purchased or new construction was completed. 

(8) "Sale" means any change in ownership of the original property for 

consideration. 

(9) "Claimant" means any person claiming the property tax relief provided by 

this section. If a spouse of that person is a record owner of the replacement dwelling, 

the spouse is also a claimant for purposes of determining whether in any future claim 

filed by the spouse under this section the condition of eligibility specified in paragraph 

(7) of subdivision (b) has been met. 

(10) "Property that is  eligible for the homeowners'  exemption" includes property 

that is the principal place of residence of its owner and is entitled to exemption pursuant 

to Section 205.5. 

(11) "Person" means any individual, but does not include any firm, partnership, 

association, corporation, company, or other legal entity or organization of any kind. 

"Person" includes an individual who is the present beneficiary of a trust. 

(12) "Severely and permanently disabled" means any person described in 

subdivision (b) of Section 74.3. 

(13) For the purposes of this section, property is "substantially damaged or 

destroyed by misfortune or calamity" if either the land or the improvements sustain 

physical damage amounting to more than 50 percent of either the land's or the 

improvement's full cash value immediately prior to the misfortune or calamity. Damage 

includes a diminution in the value of property as a result of restricted access to the 

property where the restricted access was caused by the misfortune or calamity and is 

permanent in nature. 

(h) (1) Upon the timely filing of a claim described in subparagraph (F) of 

paragraph (1) of subdivision (f), the assessor shall adjust the new base year value of 

the replacement dwelling in conformity with this section. This adjustment shall be 

made as  of the latest of the following dates: 

(A) The date the original property is sold. 

(B) The date the replacement dwelling is purchased. 

(C) The date the new construction of the replacement dwelling is completed. 

(2) Any taxes that were levied on the replacement dwelling prior to the filing of 

the claim on the basis of the replacement dwelling's new base year value, and any 

allowable annual adjustments thereto, shall be canceled or refunded to the claimant to 

the extent that the taxes exceed the amount that would be due when determined on the 

basis of the adjusted new base year value. 

(3) Notwithstanding Section 75.10, Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 75) 

shall be utilized for purposes of implementing this subdivision, including adjustments 

of the new base year value of replacement dwellings acquired prior to the sale of the 

original property. 

(4) In the case where a claim under this section has been timely filed and granted, 

and new construction is performed upon the replacement dwelling subsequent to the 

transfer of base year value, the property tax relief provided by this section also shall 

apply to the replacement dwelling, as improved, and thus there shall be no reassessment 

upon completion of the new construction if both of the following conditions are met: 

(A) The new construction is completed within two years of the date of the sale 

of the original property and the owner notifies the assessor in writing of completion 

of the new construction within six months after completion. 

(B) The fair market value of the new construction on the date of completion, 

plus the full cash value of the replacement dwelling on the date of acquisition, is not 

more than the full cash value of the original property as detennined pursuant to 

paragraph (7) of subdivision (g) for purposes of granting the original claim. 

(i) Any claimant may rescind a claim for the property tax relief provided by this 

section and shall not be considered to have received that relief for purposes of paragraph 

(7) of subdivision (b ), and the assessor shall grant the rescission, if a written notice of 

rescission is delivered to the office of the assessor as follows: 

(1) A written notice of rescission signed by the original filing claimant or 

claimants is delivered to the office of the assessor in which the original claim was filed. 

(2) (A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the notice of rescission 

is delivered to the office of the assessor before the date that the county first issues, as 

a result of relief granted under this section, a refund check for property taxes imposed 

upon the replacement dwelling. If granting relief will not result in a refund of property 

taxes, then the notice shall be delivered before payment is first made of any property 

taxes, or any portion thereof, imposed upon the replacement dwelling consistent with 

relief granted under this section. Ifpayment of the taxes is not made, then notice shall 

be delivered before the first date that those property taxes, or any portion thereof, 

imposed upon the replacement dwelling, consistent with relief granted under this 

section, are delinquent. 

(B) Notwithstanding any other provision in this division, any time the notice of 

rescission is delivered to the office of the assessor within six years after relief was 

granted, provided that the replacement property has been vacated as the claimant's 

principal place of residence within 90 days after the original claim was filed, regardless 

of whether the property continues to receive the homeowners' exemption. If the 

rescission increases the base year value of a property, or the homeowners' exemption 

has been incorrectly allowed, appropriate escape assessments or supplemental 

assessments, including interest as provided in Section 506, shall be imposed. The 

limitations periods for any escape assessments or supplemental assessments shall not 

commence until July 1 of the assessment year in which the notice of rescission is 

delivered to the office of the assessor. 

(3) The notice is accompanied by the payment of a fee as the assessor may 

require, provided that the fee shall not exceed an amount reasonably related to the 

estimated cost of processing a rescission claim, including both direct costs and 

developmental and indirect costs, such as costs for overhead, personnel, supplies, 

materials, office space, and computers. 

(j) (!) With respect to the transfer of base year value of original properties to 

replacement dwellings located in the same county, this section, except as provided in 

paragraph (3) or (4), shall apply to any replacement dwelling that is purchased or newly 

constructed on or after November 6,  1986. 

(2) With respect to the transfer of base year value of original properties to 

replacement dwellings located in different counties, except as provided in paragraph 

(4), this section shall apply to any replacement dwelling that is purchased or newly 

constructed on or after the date specified in accordance with subparagraph (E) of 

paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) in the ordinance of the county in which the replacement 

dwelling is located, but shall not apply to any replacement dwelling which was 

purchased or newly constructed before November 9,  1988. 

(3) With respect to the transfer of base year value by a severely and permanently 

disabled person, this section shall apply only to replacement dwellings that are purchased 

or newly constructed on or after June 6,  1990. 

(4)  The amendments made to subdivision ( e) by the act adding this paragraph 

shall apply only to replacement dwellings under Section 69 that are acquired or newly 

constructed on or after October 20,  1991, and shall apply commencing with the 1991-92 

fiscal year. 

(k) (1) In the case in which a county adopts an ordinance pursuant to paragraph 

(2) of subdivision (a) that establishes an applicable date which is more than three years 

prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance, those potential claimants who purchased 

or constructed replacement dwellings more than three years prior to the date of adoption 

of the ordinance and who would, therefore, be precluded from filing a timely claim, 

shall be deemed to have timely filed a claim if the claim is filed within three years after 

the date that the ordinance is adopted. This paragraph may not be construed as a waiver 

of any other requirement of this section. 

(2) In the case in which a county assessor corrects a base year value to reflect a 

pro rata change in ownership of a resident-owned mobilehome park that occurred 

between January 1,  1989, and January 1, 2002, pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision 

(b) of Section 62.1, those claimants who purchased or constructed replacement dwellings 

more than three years prior to the correction and who would, therefore, be precluded 

from filing a timely claim, shall be deemed to have timely filed a claim if the claim is 

filed within three years of the date of notice of the correction of the base year value to 

reflect the pro rata change in ownership. This paragraph may not be construed as a 

waiver of any other requirement of this section. 

(3) This subdivision does not apply to a claimant who has transferred his or her 

replacement dwelling prior to filing a claim. 

(4) The property tax relief provided by this section, but filed under this 

subdivision, shall apply prospectively only, commencing with the lien date of the 

assessment year in which the claim is filed. There shall be no refund or cancellation 

of taxes prior to the date that the claim is filed. 

(l) No escape assessment may be levied if a transfer of base year value under 

this section has been erroneously granted by the assessor pursuant to an expired 

ordinance authorizing intercounty transfers of base year value. 

(m)  (1) The amendments made to subdivisions (b) and (g) of this section by 

Chapter 613  of the Statutes of2001  shall apply: 

(A) With respect to the transfer of base year value of original properties to 

replacement dwellings located in the same county, to any replacement dwelling that 

is purchased or newly constructed on or after November 6,  1986. 

(B) With respect to the transfer of base year value of original properties to 

replacement dwellings located in different counties, to any replacement dwelling that 

is purchased or newly constructed on or after the date specified in accordance with 

subparagraph (E) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) in the ordinance of the county in 

which the replacement dwelling is located, but not to any replacement dwelling that 

was purchased or newly constructed before November 9,  1988. 

(C)With respect to the transfer of base year value by a severely and permanently 

disabled person, to replacement dwellings that are purchased or newly constructed on 

or after June 6,  1990. 

(2) The property tax relief provided by this section in accordance with this 

subdivision shall apply prospectively only commencing with the lien date of the 

assessment year in which the claim is filed.  There shall be no refund or cancellation 

of taxes prior to the date that the claim is filed. 

(n) A claim filed under this section is not a public document and is not subject 

to public inspection, except that a claim shall be available for inspection by the claimant 

or the claimant's spouse, the claimant's or the claimant's spouse's legal representative, 

the trustee of a trust in which the claimant or the claimant's spouse is  a present 

beneficiary, and the executor or administrator of the claimant's or the claimant's 

spouse's estate. 

(o) The amendments made to this section by the act adding this subdivision shall 

apply commencing with the lien date for the 2012-13 fiscal year. 

(p) This section shall remain effect only until January 1, 2019, and as of that 

date is repealed. 

SECTION 4.  Section 69.5 is added to the Revenue and Taxation Code, to read: 

69.5. (a) (1) Notwithstanding any other law, pursuant to subdivision (a) of 

Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California Constitution, the base year value of property 

that is eligible for the homeowners' exemption under subdivision (k) of Section 3 of 

Article XIII of the California Constitution and Section 218 of any person, regardless 

of age or disability and subject to the procedures provided in this section, shall be 

transferred to any replacement dwelling, regardless of the value of the replacement 

dwelling, that is located within the same county and is purchased or newly constructed 

by that person as his or her principal residence within two years of the sale by that 

person of the original property, provided that the base year value of the original property 

shall not be transferred to the replacement dwelling until the original property is sold. 

(2) For purposes of calculating the base year value of a replacement dwelling, 

the following shall apply: 

(A) For any replacement dwelling of greater value and purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property within two years of the sale of the original property, the base year value of 

the replacement dwelling shall be calculated by adding the difference between the full 

cash value of the original property and the full cash value of the replacement dwelling 

to the base year value of the original property. 

(B) For any replacement dwelling of equal or lesser value purchased or newly 

constructed by a person eligible to transfer the base year value of his or her original 

property within two years of the sale of the original property, the base year value of 

the replacement dwelling shall be calculated by dividing the base year value of the 

original property by the full cash value of the original property and multiplying 

the result by the full cash value of the replacement dwelling. 

(3) Notwithstanding the limitation in paragraph (I) requiring that the original 

property and the replacement dwelling be located in the same county, a county board 

of supervisors, after consultation with local affected agencies within the boundaries 

of the county, may adopt an ordinance making the provisions of paragraph (1) also 

applicable to situations in which a replacement dwelling is located in that county and 

the original property is located in another county within this state. An ordinance adopted 

by the board of supervisors pursuant to this paragraph shall comply with all of the 

following requirements: 

(A) The ordinance is  adopted only after consultation between the board of 

supervisors and all other local affected agencies within the county's boundaries. 

(B) The ordinance requires that all claims for transfers of the base year value 

from the original property located in another county be granted if the claims meet the 

applicable requirements of both subdivision (a) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the 

California Constitution and this section. 

(C) The ordinance requires that all base year valuations of original property 

located in another county and determined by its assessor be accepted in connection 

with the granting of claims for transfers of the base year value. 

(D) The ordinance provides that its provisions are operative for a period of not 

less than five years. 

(E) (i) The ordinance specifies the date on and after which its provisions shall 

be applicable. However, the date specified shall not be earlier than January 1, 2019. 

The specified applicable date may be a date earlier than the date the county adopts the 

ordinance. 

(ii) If a county has adopted an ordinance pursuant to paragraph ( 4) of subdivision 

(a) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California Constitution, that ordinance shall 

not be effective for transfers of the base year value subject to this section on and after 

January 1, 2019, unless the board of supervisors amends it to make necessary revisions 

to comply with paragraph (6) of subdivision (a) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the 

California Constitution and this section. 

(b) In addition to meeting the requirements of subdivision (a), any person entitled 

to the property tax relief provided by this section shall be eligible for that relief only 

if the following conditions are met: 

(1) The person is an owner and a resident of the original property either at the 

time of its sale, or at the time when the original property was substantially damaged 

or destroyed by misfortune or calamity, or within two years of the purchase or new 

construction of the replacement dwelling. 

(2) The original property is eligible for the homeowners' exemption, as the result 

of the person's ownership and occupation ofthe property as his or her principal 

residence, either at the time of its sale, or at the time when the original property was 

substantially damaged or destroyed by misfortune or calamity, or within two years of 

the purchase or new construction of the replacement dwelling. 

(3) At the time of filing for the property tax relief provided by subdivision (a), 

the person is an owner of a replacement dwelling and occupies it as his or her principal 

place of residence and, as a result thereof, the property is currently eligible for the 

homeowners'  exemption or would be eligible for the exemption except that the property 

is already receiving the exemption because of an exemption filed by the previous 

owner. 

(4)  The original property of the person is sold by him or her within two years of 

the purchase or new construction of the replacement dwelling. For purposes of this 

paragraph, the purchase or new construction of the replacement dwelling includes the 

purchase of that portion of land on which the replacement building, structure, or other 

shelter constituting a place of abode of the person will be situated and that, pursuant 

to paragraph (2) of subdivision (g), constitutes a part of the replacement dwelling. 

(5) Unless the board of supervisors has adopted an ordinance pursuant to 

paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) to the contrary, the replacement dwelling, including 

that portion of land on which it is situated that is specified in paragraph ( 4), is located 

entirely within the same county as the claimant's original property. 

(c) ( 1) The property tax relief provided by this section shall be available if the 

original property or the replacement dwelling, or both, of the person includes, but is 

not limited to, either of the following: 

(A) A unit or lot within a cooperative housing corporation, a community 

apartment project, a condominium project, or a planned unit development. If the unit 

or lot constitutes the original property of the person, the assessor shall transfer to the 

person's replacement dwelling only the base year value of the person's unit or lot and 

his or her share in any common area reserved as an appurtenance of that unit or lot. If 

the unit or lot constitutes the replacement dwelling of the person, the assessor shall 

transfer the base year value of the person's original property only to the unit or lot of 

the claimant and any share of the person in any common area reserved as an 

appurtenance of that unit or lot. 

(B) A manufactured home or a manufactured home and any land owned by the 

person on which the manufactured home is situated. For purposes of this paragraph, 

"land owned by the person" includes a pro rata interest in a resident-owned mobilehome 

park that is assessed pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 62.1. 

(i) If the manufactured home or the manufactured home and the land on which 

it is situated constitutes the person's original property, the assessor shall transfer to the 

person's replacement dwelling either the base year value of the manufactured home 

or the base year value of the manufactured home and the land on which it is situated, 

as appropriate. If the manufactured home dwelling that constitutes the original property 

of the person includes an interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park, the assessor 

shall transfer to the person's replacement dwelling the base year value of the person's 

manufactured home and his or her pro rata portion of the real property of the park. No 

transfer of base year value shall be made by the assessor of that portion ofland that 

does not constitute a part of the original property, as provided in paragraph (3) of 

subdivision (g). 

(ii) If the manufactured home or the manufactured home and the land on which 

it is situated constitutes the claimant's replacement dwelling, the assessor shall transfer 

the base year value of the claimant's original property either to the manufactured home 

or the manufactured home and the land on which it is situated, as appropriate. Ifthe 

manufactured home dwelling that constitutes the replacement dwelling of the claimant 

includes an interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park, the assessor shall transfer 

the base year value of the claimant's original property to the manufactured home of 

the claimant and his or her pro rata portion of the park. No transfer of base year value 

shall be made by the assessor to that portion of land that does not constitute a part of 

the replacement dwelling, as provided in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g). 

(2) This subdivision shall be subject to the limitations specified in subdivision 

(d). 

(d) The property tax relief provided by this section shall be available to a person 

who is the coowner of the original property, as a joint tenant, a tenant in common, a 

community property owner, or a present beneficiary of a trust subject to the following 

limitations: 

(1) If a single replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed by all of 

the coowners and each coowner retains an interest in the replacement dwelling, the 

person filing for the transfer of base year value shall be eligible under this section 

whether or not any or all of the remaining coowners would otherwise be eligible. 

(2) If two or more replacement dwellings are separately purchased or newly 

constructed by two or more coowners and more than one coowner would otherwise be 

eligible to transfer base year value pursuant to this section, all coowners shall have the 

base year value of the original property transferred to any replacement dwelling in 

proportion to their ownership interest in the original property. In the case of coowners 

whose original property is a multiunit dwelling, the limitation imposed by this paragraph 

shall only apply to coowners who occupied the same dwelling unit within the original 

property at the time specified in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b ). 

(e) Upon the sale of original property, the assessor shall detennine a new base 

year value for that property in accordance with subdivision ( a) of Section 2 of Article 

XIII A of the California Constitution and Section 110 .1, whether or not a replacement 

dwelling is subsequently purchased or newly constructed by the fonner owner or owners 

of the original property. This section shall not apply unless the transfer of the original 

property is a change in ownership that either (1) subjects that property to reappraisal 

at its current fair market value in accordance with Section 110.1  or 5803 or (2) results 

in a base year value determined in accordance with this section, Section 69, or Section 

69.3  because the property qualifies under this section, Section 69, or Section 69 .3  as 

a replacement dwelling or property. 

(f) ( 1) A person entitled the property tax relief provided by this section shall 

provide to the assessor, on a fonn that shall be designed by the State Board of 

Equalization and that the assessor shall make available upon purchase of the replacement 

dwelling at the time in which the replacement dwelling would ordinarily be subject to 

reappraisal at its current fair market value, the following information: 

(A) The name and social security number of each person who resides at the 

property and who is eligible for the homeowner's exemption. 

(B) The address and, if known, the assessor's parcel number of the original 

property. 

(C) The date of the sale of the person's original property and the date of the 

purchase or new construction of a replacement dwelling. 

(D) A statement by the person that he or she occupied the replacement dwelling 

as his or her principal place of residence on the date of the filing of his or her claim. 

(2) The form required by this subdivision shall be filed within three years of the 

date the replacement dwelling was purchased or the new construction of the replacement 

dwelling was completed. Any form filed after the expiration of the filing period set 

forth in this paragraph shall be considered by the assessor, subject to all of the following 

conditions: 

(A) Any base year value transfer granted pursuant to that filing shall apply 

commencing with the lien date of the assessment year in which the form is filed. 

(B) The full cash value of the replacement property in the assessment year 

described in subparagraph (A) shall be the base year value of the real property in the 

assessment year in which the base year value was transferred, factored to the assessment 

year described in subparagraph (A) for both of the following: 

(i) Inflation as annually determined in accordance with paragraph (1) of 

subdivision (a) of Section 51. 

(ii) Any subsequent new construction occurring with respect to the subject real 

property that does not qualify for property tax relief pursuant to the criteria set forth 

in paragraph (4) of subdivision (h). 

(g) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 

(1) (A) "Base year value of the original property" means its base year value, as 

determined in accordance with Section 110.1, with the adjustments permitted by 

subdivision (b) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California Constitution and 

subdivision(±) of Section 110.1, determined as of the date immediately prior to the 

date that the original property is sold by the claimant, or in the case where the original 

property has been substantially damaged or destroyed by misfortune or calamity and 

the owner does not rebuild on the original property, determined as  of the date 

immediately prior to the misfortune or calamity. 

(B) If the replacement dwelling is purchased or newly constructed after the 

transfer of the original property, "base year value of the original property" also includes 

any inflation factor adjustments permitted by subdivision (f) of Section 110.1  for the 

period subsequent to the sale of the original property. The base year or years used to 

compute the "base year value of the original property" shall be deemed to be the base 

year or years of any property to which that base year value is transferred pursuant to 

this section. 

(2) "Replacement dwelling" means a building, structure, or other shelter 

constituting a place of abode, whether real property or personal property, that is  owned 

and occupied by a person as his or her principal place of residence, and any land owned 

by the person on which the building, structure, or other shelter is situated. For purposes 

of this paragraph, land constituting a part of a replacement dwelling includes only that 

area of reasonable size that is used as a site for a residence, and "land owned by the 

person" includes land for which the person either holds a leasehold interest described 

in subdivision ( c) of Section 61  or a land purchase contract. Each unit of a multiunit 

dwelling shall be considered a separate replacement dwelling. For purposes of this 

paragraph, "area of reasonable size that is used as a site for a residence" includes all 

land if any nonresidential uses of the property are only incidental to the use of the 

property as a residential site. For purposes of this paragraph, "land owned by the person" 

includes an ownership interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park that is assessed 

pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 62.1. 

(3) "Original property" means a building, structure, or other shelter constituting 

a place of abode, whether real property or personal property, that is owned and occupied 

by a person as his or her principal place of residence, and any land owned by the person 

on which the building, structure, or other shelter is situated. For purposes of this 

paragraph, land constituting a part of the original property includes only that area of 

reasonable size that is used as  a site for a residence, and "land owned by the person" 

includes land for which the person either holds a leasehold interest described in 

subdivision (c) of Section 61  or a land purchase contract. Each unit of a multiunit 

dwelling shall be considered a separate original property. For purposes of this paragraph, 

"area of reasonable size that is used as  a site for a residence" includes all land if any 

nonresidential uses of the property are only incidental to the use of the property as a 

residential site. For purposes of this paragraph, "land owned by the person" includes 

an ownership interest in a resident-owned mobilehome park that is assessed pursuant 

to subdivision (b) of Section 62.1. 

(4) "Full cash value of the replacement dwelling" means its full cash value, 

determined in accordance with Section 110.1, as of the date on which it was purchased 

or new construction was completed, and after the purchase or the completion of new 

construction. 

(5) "Full cash value of the original property" means, either: 

(A) Its new base year value, detennined in accordance with subdivision (e), 

without the application of subdivision (h) of Section 2 of Article XIII A  of the California 

Constitution, plus the adjustments permitted by subdivision (b) of Section 2 of Article 

XIII A and subdivision ( f) of Section 110.1  for the period from the date of its sale by 

the person to the date on which the replacement property was purchased or new 

construction was completed. 

(B) In the case where the original property has been substantially damaged or 

destroyed by misfortune or calamity and the owner does not rebuild on the original 

property, its full cash value, as  determined in accordance with Section 110, innnediately 

prior to its substantial damage or destruction by misfortune or calamity, as determined 

by the county assessor of the county in which the property is located, without the 

application of subdivision (h) of Section 2 of Article XIII A of the California 

Constitution, plus the adjustments permitted by subdivision (b) of Section 2 of Article 

XIII A of the California Constitution and subdivision (f) of Section 110.1, for the period 

from the date of its sale by the person to the date on which the replacement property 

was purchased or new construction was completed. 

(6) "Sale" means any change in ownership of the original property for 

consideration. 

(7) "Person" means any individual, but not any firm, partnership, association, 

corporation, company, or other legal entity or organization of any kind, who files for 

the property tax relief provided by this section. "Person" includes an individual who 

is the present beneficiary of a trust. 

(8) "Property that is eligible for the homeowners'  exemption" includes property 

that is the principal place of residence of its owner and is  entitled to exemption pursuant 

to Section 205.5. 

(9) Property is "substantially damaged or destroyed by misfortune or calamity" 

if either the land or the improvements sustain physical damage amounting to more than 

50 percent of either the land's or the improvement's full cash value immediately prior 

to the misfortune or calamity. Damage includes a diminution in the value of property 

as a result of restricted access to the property where the restricted access was caused 

by the misfortune or calamity and is permanent in nature. 

(h) (!) Upon the timely filing ofa form,  as  described in subdivision (f), the 

assessor shall adjust the new base year value of the replacement dwelling in conformity 

with this section. This adjustment shall be made as of the latest of the following dates: 

(A) The date the original property is sold. 

(B) The date the replacement dwelling is purchased. 

(C) The date the new construction of the replacement dwelling is completed. 

(2) Any taxes that were levied on the replacement dwelling prior to the filing 

for the property tax relief provided by this section on the basis of the replacement 

dwelling's new base year value, and any allowable annual adjustments to that new 

base year value, shall be canceled or refunded to the person to the extent that the taxes 

exceed the amount that would be due when determined on the basis of the adjusted 

new base year value. 

(3) Notwithstanding Section 75.10, Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 75) 

shall be utilized for purposes of implementing this subdivision, including adjustments 

of the new base year value of replacement dwellings acquired prior to the sale of the 

original property. 

(4) In the case where a form under this section has been timely filed,  and new 

construction is performed upon the replacement dwelling subsequent to the transfer of 

base year value, the property tax relief provided by this section also shall apply to the 

replacement dwelling, as improved, and thus there shall be no reassessment upon 

completion of the new construction if the new construction is completed within two 

years of the date of the sale of the original property and the owner notifies the assessor 

in writing of completion of the new construction within six months after completion 

(i)  (1) With respect to the transfer of the base year value of original properties 

to replacement dwellings, this section shall apply to any replacement dwelling that is 

purchased or newly constructed on or after January 1, 2019. 

(2) With respect to the transfer of the base year value of original properties to 

replacement dwellings located in different counties, this section shall apply to any 

replacement dwelling that is purchased or newly constructed on or after the date 

specified, in accordance with subparagraph (E) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (a), in 

the ordinance of the county in which the replacement dwelling is  located, but shall not 

apply to any replacement dwelling which was purchased or newly constructed before 

January 1, 2019. 

(j)  A form filed under this section is not a public document and is not subject to 
public inspection, except that the form shall be available for inspection by the person 

or his or her spouse, the person's or his or her spouse's legal representative, the trustee 

of a trust in which the person or his or her spouse is a present beneficiary, and the 

executor or administrator of the person's or his or her spouse's estate. 

(k) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2019. 

SECTION 5.  The statutory provisions of this measure may be amended by a two-thirds 

vote of the members of each house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor so long 

as the amendments are consistent with and further the intent of this act. 

SECTION 6.  The provisions of this act are severable. If any provision of this act or 

its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or 

applications that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. 

