17-002 0 

FOUNDATION TO STOP TOP 2 

P.O. Box 2413 

Rancho Cucamonga, CA 91729 

REPEAL THE TOP TWO CANDIDATES OPEN PRIMARY LAW 

www .stoptop2.com 

August 10, 2017 

Ms.  Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
P.O.  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 

Dear M s.  Johansson: 

RECEIVED 

AUG  2 1 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

I' m submitting the enclosed draft of an  Initiative Measure to Repeal the Top Two Candidates Open 
Primary Law.  I'm requesting a review by the Attorney General and a Unique Numeric Identifier, 
Circulating Title and Circulating Summary as they are to appear on the petition s for circulation. 

I'm also requesting that the Attorney General display the information on the AG' s website. 

Enclosed please find the $2,000 fee required (Check #3010) . 

Sincerely, 

--zz;:::::;·§  ~ v-L/ 

if 

Thomas E. Palzer 
Chairman & State Coordinator 
Foundation to Stop Top 2 

-

Paid for by the Foundation to Stop Top 2 and Tom Palzer 

17-0020 

60461 

04/26/17  02: 18 PM 
RN 17 12035  PAGE  1 

INITIATIVE MEASURE TO BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

12-point 
Boldface 
~ 

The Attorney General of California has prepared the following circulating title 

and summary of the chief purpose and points of the proposed measure: 

(Here set forth the unique numeric identifier provided by the Attorney General 

and circulating title and summary prepared by the Attorney General. Both the Attorney 

General's unique numeric identifier and the circulating title and summary must also 

be printed across the top of each page of the petition whereon signatures are to appear.) 

TO THE HONORABLE SECRETARY OF STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

Type: Roman 
Boldface not 
smaller than 
12-point 

We, the undersigned, registered, qualified voters of California, residents of San 

Bernardino County, hereby propose amendments to the Constitution of California, and 

petition the Secretary of State to submit the same to the voters of California for their 

adoption or rejection at the next succeeding general election or at any special statewide 

election held prior to that general election or as otherwise provided by law. The proposed 

constitutional amendment reads as follows: 

SECTION 1.  Section 5 of Article II of the California Constitution is amended 

to read: 

60461 

04/26/17  02: 18 PM 
RN 17 12035  PAGE 2 

SEC. 5.  (a) A voteM:iom.inatiott pfim.ary eleetiott shall be cottdueted to select 

the candidates fer eongfessional and state elective offiees in Califernia. All ·1oters m.ay 

vote at a ·1otef nominated primary eleetion fer any eandidate fof eongressional and 

state elective office withottt rngard to the political party prcfcfcnce disclosed by the 

candidate Of the voter, pfovided that the votef is othefViise qualified to vote fer 

ca:Hdidates fof the office in question. The candidates who are the top two vote getters 

at a voter-nominated primary election fer a eongressional or state elective offiee shall, 

regardless of party prefcrenee, compete in the ensuing genefal eleetion. 

(b) Exeept as othcr,.vise provided by Section 6, a eandidate fef a coftgfessional 

or state elective office m.ay have his or hef political party pfcfcfenee, or lack of political 

party pfefcrenee, indicated upon the ballot fef the office in the m.anncf pro·1idcd by 

statute. A political pafty Of party ecntral eonunittee shall not nomiftate a candidate for 

any  congressional or state elective office at the "voter nominated primary. This 

subdivision shall not be interp1·eted to pfohibit a political party Of party central 

e01n1nittee frmn endofsing, suppoftifl.g, Of opposing any candidate for a eongressioftal 

or state elective office. A political party or party centfal eon1mittee shall not ha·1e the 

right to have its prefcncd candidate participate in the general election for a 

voter nominated office other than a candidate who is one of the hvo highest vote  gettefs 

at the primary  election, as provided in s ubdi. ision (a). 

(e) The 

SEC. 5.  (a) The Legislature shall provide for partisan primary elections for 

presidefttial candidates, and political party and party· ccHtfal eofl:1111ittees, partisan 

offices, including an open presidential primary whereby the candidates on the ballot 

60461 

04/26/17  02: 18 PM 
RN 17 12035  PAGE 3 

are those found by the Secretary of State to be recognized candidates throughout the 

nation or throughout California for the office of President of the United States, and 

those whose names are placed on the ballot by petition, but excluding any candidate 

who has withdrawn by filing an affidavit of noncandidacy. 

(hl A political party that participated participates in a primary election for a 

partisan office punma:nt to sttbdivision (e) has the right to participate in the general 

election for that office and shall not be denied the ability to place on the general election 

ballot the candidate who received, at the primary election, the highest vote among that 

party's candidates. 

- 0 -

