June 7, 2017 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 17th Floor 
Sacramento, California 95814 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

1 7  - 0  0  0  4 

Arndt.#  J 

RECEIVED 

JUN  O 7 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

I am the proponent oflnitiative 17-0004, "Repeal the Gas Tax."  Attached, please find amended 
language for the initiative. 

Pursuant to Elections Code Section 9002(b ), I hereby and request a circulating title and summary 
be prepared using the amended language. 

Sincerely, 

?~~ 

Travis Allen 

'I 

1 7  - 0  0  0  4 

Arndt.#  I 

SECTION 1.  Section 14033 of the Government Code is repealed: 

14033. On or before January  1,  2018,  the department shall update the Higlrvvay Design Manual 

to incorporate the "complete streets" design concept. 

SEC. 2. Section 14110 of the Government Code is repealed: 

14110.  Consistent vlith federal  and  state lav,rs  and regulations,  including,  but not limited to,  the 

department's goal setting methodology as  approved by the Federal Higw.vay Administration, the 

department shall develop  a plan by January  1,  2020, to  increase by up to  100 percent the dollar 

value  of  contracts  and  procurements  av,rarded  to  small  businesses,  disadvantaged  business 

enterprises,  and disabled veteran business  enterprises.  The plan shall include the use of targeted 

media, including minority and  women business  enterprises,  to  outreach to  these businesses  and 

shall be provided to the Legislature pursuant to Section 9795. 

SEC.  3. Chapter  5  (commencing with  Section  14460)  of Part 5  of Division  3 of Title  2  of the 

Government Code is repealed: 

CHAPTER 5. Department of Transportation independent Office of }.udits and 

Investigations 

14460.  (a) There  is  hereby  created  in  the  department  the  Independent  Office  of Audits  and 

Investigations to ensure all of the following: 

(1) The department,  and external  entities that receive state and federal  transportation funds  from 

the  department,  are  spending  those  funds  efficiently,  effectively,  economically,  and  in 

compliance vlith  applicable  state  and  federal  requirements.  Those  external  entities  include,  but 

are  not  limited  to,  private  for  profit  and  nonprofit  organizations,  local  transportation  agencies, 

and  other  local  agencies  that  receive  transportation  funds  either  through  a  contract  vv'ith  the 

department or through an agreement or grant administered by the department. 

(2) The  department's  programs  are  functioning  consistent vlith  applicable  accounting  standards 

and practices and are administered effectively, efficiently, and economically. 

(3) The  department's  management  is  accomplishing  departmental  priorities,  developing  an 

annual audit plan, administering an effective enterprise risk management program, and is making 

efficient, effective, and financially responsible transportation decisions. 

(4) The Secretary of Transportation, the Legislature,  the  California Transportation Commission, 

and the director and chief deputy director of the department are fully informed concerning fraud, 

improper  activities,  or  other  serious  abuses  or  deficiencies  relating  to  the  expenditure  of 

transportation funds  or administration of department programs and operations. 

(b) The  Governor  shall  appoint  the  director  of the  Audits  and  Investigations  Office,  who  shall 

serve a six year term, have the title of Inspector General,  and be subject to Senate confirmation. 

The Inspector General may not be removed from office during that term,  except for  good cause. 

The reasons  for removal of the Inspector General shall be stated in writing and shall include the 

basis for removal. The v,rriting shall be sent to the Secretary of the Senate and the Chief Clerk of 

the Assembly at the time of the removal and shall be deemed to be a public document. 

(c) The  Inspector  General  is  vested  with  the  full  authority  to  exercise  all  responsibility  for 

maintaining  a  full  scope,  independent,  and  objective  audit  and  investigation  program  as 

prescribed by Sections  1237,  13885,  13886.5,  13887.5, and  13888, including, but not limited to, 

those activities described in Section 14 4 61. 

(d) Nohvithstanding Section 13887, in order to achieve independence and objectivity pursuant to 

this  section,  the  Independent Office  of Audits  and  Investigation shall  meet  all  of the  following 

requirements: 


(1) The  Inspector  General  shall  report  all  audit  and  confidential  investigation  findings  and 

recommendations made under his  or her jurisdiction to  the  Secretary of Transportation and  the 

director and chief deputy director of the department on an ongoing and current basis. 

(2) The  Inspector  General  shall  report  at  least  annually,  or upon request,  to  the  Governor,  the 

Legislature,  and  the  California  Transportation  Commission  vlith  a  summary  of  his  or  her 

investigation  and  audit  findings  and  recommendations.  The  summary  shall  be  posted  on  the 

office's Internet \V:eb  site and shall otherwise be made available to  the public upon its release to 

the Governor,  commission, and Legislature.  The summary shall include, but need not be limited 

to, significant problems discovered by the Inspector General and vmether the Inspector General's 

recommendations  relative  to  audits  and  investigations  have  been implemented by the  affected 

units and programs of the department or affected external  entities.  The report shall be submitted 

to the Legislature in compliance with Section 9795. 

14461. The Inspector General shall review policies, practices, and procedures and conduct audits 

and  investigations  of  activities  involving  state  transportation  funds  administered  by  the 

department in consultation 1.vith  all  affected units  and programs  of the department  and  external 

entities. 

SEC. 4.  Section 14526.5 of the Government Code is amended to read: 

14526.5. (a) Based  on  the  asset  management  plan  prepared  and  approved  pursuant  to  Section 

14526.4, the department shall prepare a state highway operation and protection program for  the 

expenditure of transportation funds  for major capital improvements that are necessary to preserve 

and protect the state highway system. Projects included in the program shall be limited to capital 

improvements relative to the maintenance, safety, operation, and rehabilitation of state highways 

and bridges that do not add a new traffic lane to the system. 

(b) The program  shall  include projects that are  expected to  be advertised prior to  July  1 of the 

year  following  submission  of the  program,  but which have not  yet been funded.  The  program 

shall  include those  projects  for  which  construction is  to  begin within four  fiscal  years,  starting 

July 1 of the year following the year the program is submitted. 

(c) fB  The  department,  at  a  minimum,  shall  specify,  for  each  project  in  the  state  highway 

operation and protection program, the capital and support budget, as well as  a projected delivery 

date, applicable, for each of the following project components: phases: 

ill fAt  Completion  of  project Project  approval  and  environmental documents. documents, 

support only. 

filtB1-Preparation of plans, Plans, specifications, and estimates. estimates, support only. 

(C) Rights  of way. 

(D) Construction . 

.Q).._f2)-Acquisition  of  rights-of-way,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  support  activities. The 

department shall specify, for each project in the state highway operation and protection program, 

a projected delivery date for each of the following components: 

(A) Project approval and environmental document completion. 

(B) Plans, specifications, and estimates completion. 

(C) Right-of-way certification. 

filfD)-Start of construction. 

(d) The program  shall  be  submitted department  shall  sabmit  its  proposed  program  to  the 

commission not later than January 31  of each even-numbered year.  Prior to  submitting the plan, 

the its proposed program, the department shall make a draft of its proposed program available to 

transportation planning agencies  for review and  comment and shall  include the comments in its 


submittal  to  the  commission. The  department  shall  provide  the  comm1ss1on  with  detailed 
information  for  all  programmed projects  on cost,  scope,  schedule,  and  performance metrics  as 
determined by the commission. 
(e) The  commission may shall-review  the proposed program  relative  to  its  overall  adequacy, 
consistency with the asset management plan prepared and approved pursuant to  Section 14526.4 
and funding priorities established in Section 167 of the Streets and Highways Code, the level of 
annual  funding  needed to  implement the program,  and the impact of those  expenditures  on the 
state transportation improvement program.  The commission shall adopt the program and submit 
it to  the  Legislature  and  the  Governor not later than April  1 of each  even-numbered  year.  The 
commission may decline to adopt the program if the commission determines that the program is 
not  sufficiently consistent  with  the  asset management plan prepared  and  approved pursuant to 
Section 14526.4. 
(f) As part of the  commission's revievv'  of the program required pursuant to  subdivision (a), the 
commission shall  hold  at  least  one hearing in northern  California  and  one hearing  in southern 
California regarding the proposed program. 
(g) On or after July 1,  2017, to provide sufficient and transparent oversight of the department's 
capital  outlay support  resources  composed  of both state  staff and  contractors,  the  commission 
shall be required to  allocate the department's  capital outlay support resources by project phase, 
including preconstruction. Through this action, the commission vv'ill provide public transparency 
for  the  department's  budget  estimates,  increasing  assurance  that  the  annual  budget  forecast  is 
reasonable.  The  commission  shall  develop  guidelines,  in  consultation  1vvith  the  department,  to 
implement this subdivision. Guidelines adopted by the commission to implement this subdivision 
shall be exempt from the Administrative Procedure Act (Chapter 3.5  (commencing v1ith Section 
11340) of Part 1). 
(h) Beginning July  1,  2017,  for  a  project that  experiences  increases in capital  or  support costs 
above  the  amounts  in the  commission's  allocation pursuant to  subdivision  (g),  the  commission 
shall  establish  a  threshold  for  requiring  a  supplemental  project  allocation.  The  commission's 
guidelines  adopted  pursuant  to  subdivision  (g)  shall  also  establish  the  threshold  that  the 
commission  detennines  is  necessary  to  ensure  efficiency  and  may  provide  exceptions  as 
necessary so that projects are not unnecessarily delayed. 
(i) The  department,  for  each  project  requiring  a  supplemental  project  allocation  pursuant  to 
subdivision (h), shall submit a request to the commission for its approval. 
.(fL(:H-Expenditures for these projects shall not be subject to Sections 188 and 188.8 of the Streets 
and Highways Code. 
SEC. 5. Section 14526.7 of the Government Code is repealed: 
14526.7. (a) The  department  shall  incorporate  the  performance  targets  in  subdivision  (n)-of 
Section  1  of  the  act  adding  this  section  into  the  asset  management  plan  adopted  by  the 
commission  and targets  adopted by the  commission pursuant to  Sections  14526.4  and  14526.5. 
The asset management plan shall also include targets adopted by the commission in consultation 
vlith the department for each asset class included in subdivision (n) of Section 1 of the act adding 
this  section  to  measure  the  degree  to  vv'lrich  progress  was  made  towards  achieving  the  overall 
2027  targets.  Targets  may  be  modified  by  the  commission  as  needed  to  conform  to  federal 
regulation on perfonnance measures  and the completion of the department's  asset management 
plan.  Nothing  in  this  section  precludes  the  commission  from  adopting  additional  targets  and 
perfonnance measures pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 14526.4. 

(b) A,s  specified  by  guidelines  adopted  by the  commission,  the  department  shall  report  to  the 
commission on its progress tov1ard meeting the targets and performance measures established for 
state  higlnvays  pursuant  to  subdivision  (n)  of Section  l  of the  act  adding  this  section  and 
paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 14526.4. 
SEC. 6.  Section 14556.41  of the Government Code is repealed: 
14556.41. As  of June  30,  2017,  projects  in Section  14556.40  for  the  Traffic  Congestion Relief 
Program  shall  be  deemed  complete  and  final,  and  funding  levels  shall  be  based  on  actual 
amounts  requested  by  the  designated  lead  applicant  pursuant  to  Section  14556.12.  Projects 
·.vithout  approved  applications  in  accordance  with  Section  14556.12  shall  no  longer be eligible 
for  program  funding.  Traffic  Congestion  Relief Program  savings  shall  be  transferred  to  other 
transportation accounts for the purposes speem-ed in Section 16321. 
SEC. 7. Section 63048.66 is added to the Government Code, to read: 
63048.66. (a) Notwithstanding  Section 63048.65  or any other provision of this  article,  compact 
assets that are subject to  designation by the Director of Finance for  sale pursuant to  subdivision 
(a)  of Section  63048.65  and  that  are  timely  deposited  or  are  due  for  deposit  in  the  Special 
Deposit Fund on or after July 1, 2008, and on or before June 30, 2016, shall not be available for 
the purpose of Section 63048.65. 
(b) The  Director  of Finance  shall  detennine  the  portion  of the  compact  assets  described  in 
subdivision  (a)  that  are  attributable  to  payments  made  for  each  fiscal  year.  The  Director  of 
Finance may direct the Controller, by separate order applicable to the assets for  each fiscal  year, 
to transfer the compact assets attributable to that fiscal year from the Special Deposit Fund to the 
General Fund. 
(c) Upon  order  of the  Director  of Finance,  the  Controller  shall  transfer  the  compact  assets  as 
provided in subdivision (b). 
(d) If any legal challenges to the issuance of bonds pursuant to this article are settled sufficiently 
for the bonds to be sold, the following shall occur: 
(1) Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  the tribal  assets  described in subdivision (a)  that are in the 
Special  Deposit Fund,  or  are  still  due  for  payment to  the  Special  Deposit Fund,  may be made 
available for sale pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 63048.65. 
(2) The  transfer  of any  compact  assets  to  the  General  Fund  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be 
suspended until  after the bonds  are  sold,  and any possible future  transfers  to  the  General  Fund 
shall be consistent with the provisions of the bond sale. 
SEC. 8.  Section 63048.67 is added to the Government Code, to read: 
63048.67.  The  loans  made  from  the  State  Highway  Account  through  the  Traffic  Congestion 
Relief  Fund  to  the  General  Fund  that  are  referenced  in  clause  (i)  of  subparagraph  (A)  of 
paragraph (1)  of subdivision (c)  of Section 63048.65  are hereby determined to  have been from 
weight  fee  revenues  in the  State Highway Account fund  balance.  Any repayments made to  the 
State Highway Account pursuant to  subdivision (e)  of Section 63048.65, upon transfer of those 
funds to the State Highway Account, shall be immediately transferred by the Controller from the 
State  Highway Account  to  the  Transportation  Debt  Service  Fund  for  use  pursuant  to  Section 
16965. 
SEC. 9. Section 63048.7 is added to the Government Code, to read: 
63048.7.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of this  division,  Article  3  (commencing  with 
Section 63040),  Article 4  (commencing with  Section  63042),  and  Article  5  (commencing  with 
Section 63043) do not apply to  any bonds issued by the special purpose trust established by this 

article.  All matters  authorized in this article are in addition to  powers  granted to the bank in this 
division. 
SEC. 10. Section 63048.75 is added to the Government Code, to read: 
63048.75.  Any sale  of some or all  of the  compact assets  under this  article  shall be treated  as  a 
true sale and  absolute transfer of the property so  transferred to  the special purpose trust and not 
as  a  pledge  or  grant  of a  security  interest  by the  state,  the  bank  board,  or  the  bank  for  any 
borrowing.  The characterization of the  sale of any of those assets  as  an  absolute transfer by the 
participants  shall  not  be  negated  or  adversely  affected  by the  fact  that  only  a  portion  of the 
compact  assets  is  transferred,  nor  by the  state's  acquisition  of an  ownership  interest  in  any 
residual interest in the compact assets, nor by any characterization of the special purpose trust or 
its  bonds  for  purposes  of accounting,  taxation,  or  securities  regulation,  nor by any other factor 
whatsoever. 
SEC. 11. Section 63048.8 is added to the Government Code, to read: 
63048.8.  (a) (1) On  and  after  the  effective  date  of each  sale  of compact  assets,  the  state  shall 
have no  right,  title,  or interest in or to  the  compact assets  sold,  and  the  compact assets  so  sold 
shall be property of the special purpose trust and not of the state, the bank board, or the bank, and 
shall be owned, received, held,  and  disbursed by the special purpose trust  or the trustee for  the 
financing.  None of the compact assets sold by the state pursuant to this article shall be subject to 
garnishment,  levy,  execution,  attachment,  or other process, writ,  including, but not limited to,  a 
writ of mandate,  or remedy in connection with the assertion or enforcement of any debt,  claim, 
settlement, or judgment against the state, the bank board, or the bank. 
(2) On or before the effective date of any  sale,  the state,  acting through the Director of Finance, 
upon direction of the bank,  shall notify each tribe that has  executed a designated tribal  compact 
that the particular compact assets that have been sold to the special purpose trust and irrevocably 
instruct the tribe that,  as  of the applicable effective date and so long as the bonds secured by the 
compact assets are  outstanding,  the compact assets  sold are to be paid directly to  the trustee for 
the  applicable bonds  of the  special  purpose  trust.  Certification by the  Director of Finance  that 
this notice has been given shall be conclusive evidence thereof for purposes of this article. 
(3) The state pledges and agrees with the holders of any bonds issued by the special purpose trust 
that it will not authorize anyone other than an Indian tribe with a federally authorized compact to 
engage  in  specified  gaming  activities  within  the  defined  core  geographic  market  of an  Indian 
tribe that is  a party to  a designated tribal compact in violation of the designated tribal compact as 
ratified by the  Legislature,  unless  adequate provision is  made by law  for  the  protection of the 
holders of bonds in a manner consistent with the indenture or trust agreement pursuant to which 
the bonds are issued. The state pledges to and agrees with the holders of any bonds issued by the 
special purpose trust that  it will  (A)  enforce  its  rights  to  collect the  compact assets  sold to  the 
special purpose trust pursuant to this article, (B) not amend any designated tribal compact or take 
any other action,  that would in any way diminish,  limit,  or impair the rights  to  receive compact 
assets sold to  the special purpose trust pursuant to  this  article, and (C) not in any way impair the 
rights  and  remedies  of bondholders  or  the  security  for  their  bonds  until,  in  each  case,  those 
bonds, together with the interest thereon and costs and expenses in connection with any action or 
proceeding on behalf of the bondholders, are fully paid and discharged or otherwise provided for 
pursuant  to  the  terms  of the  indenture  or  trust  agreement  pursuant  to  which  those  bonds  are 
issued.  The  special  purpose  trust  may  include  these  pledges  and  undertakings  in  its  bonds. 
Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  article,  inherent  police  powers  that  cannot  be 
contracted away are reserved to the state. 

(b) Bonds issued pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the state nor a 

pledge  of the  faith  or  credit  of the  state,  and  all  bonds  shall  contain on the  face  of the bond  a 

statement to  the effect that neither the faith  and  credit nor the taxing power nor any other assets 

or revenues of the state or of any political subdivision of the state other than the special purpose 

trust, is or shall be pledged to the payment of the principal of or the interest on the bonds. 

(c) Whether or not the bonds  are of a form  and character as  to  be negotiable instruments under 

the terms  of the Uniform Commercial Code,  the bonds are hereby made negotiable instruments 

for all purposes, subject only to the provisions of the bonds for registration. 

(d) The  special  purpose  trust  and  the  bank  shall  be treated  as  public  agencies  for  purposes  of 

Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 860)  of Title  10  of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 

and  any  action  or  proceeding  challenging  the  validity of any matter  authorized  by this  article 

shall be brought in accordance with, and within the time specified in, that chapter. 

(e) Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of law,  the  exclusive  means  to  obtain  review  of a 

superior court  judgment  entered in  an  action brought pursuant to  Chapter 9  ( commencing with 

Section 860) of Title 10 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure to determine the validity of any 

bonds to be issued, any other contracts to be entered into, or any other matters authorized by this 

article  shall  be by petition to  the  Supreme Court for  writ of review.  Any such petition shall be 

filed  within  15  days  following  the  notice  of entry  of the  superior  court  judgment,  and  no 

extension of that period shall be allowed.  If no  petition is  filed  within the time allowed for  this 

purpose, or the petition is denied, with or without opinion, the decision of the superior court shall 

be  final  and  enforceable  as  provided  in  subdivision  (a)  of Section  870  of the  Code  of Civil 

Procedure.  In any case in which a petition has been filed  within the time allowed,  the  Supreme 

Court shall make  any orders  as  it may deem proper in the circumstances.  If no  answering party 

appeared in the superior court action,  the only issues that may be raised in the petition are those 

related  to  the  jurisdiction  of the  superior  court.  Nothing  in this  subdivision  or  subdivision  (d) 

shall be construed as  granting standing to challenge the designated tribal compacts. 

SEC. 12. Section 63048.85 is added to the Government Code, to read: 

63048.85. (a) The  Legislature  finds  and  declares  that,  because  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of 

compact  assets  authorized  by  this  article  are  not  "proceeds  of taxes"  as  that  term  is  used  in 

Article XIII B of the California Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to 

the limitations imposed by that article. 

(b) Compact assets shall not be deemed to be "State General Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated 

pursuant  to  Article  XIII B"  within  the  meaning  of Section  8  of Article  XVI  of the  California 

Constitution, Section 41202 of the Education Code, or any other provision oflaw. 

(c) Compact assets  are not General  Fund revenues  for  the purposes  of Section 8 of Article XVI 

of the California Constitution or any other provision oflaw. 

SEC. 13. Section 99312.1  of the Public Utilities Code is amended to read: 

99312.1. tat-Revenues  transferred  to  the  Public  Transportation  Account  pursuant  to  Sections 

6051.8  and  6201.8  of  the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code for  the  State  Transit  Assistance 

Program are hereby continuously appropriated to the Controller for allocation as follows: 

(.ru__Jlt-Fifty  percent  for  allocation  to  transportation  planning  agencies,  county  transportation 

commissions,  and  the  San  Diego  Metropolitan Transit Development Board pursuant to  Section 

99314. 

(hl_f±)-Fifty percent for allocation to transportation agencies, county transportation commissions, 

and the San Diego Metropolitan Transit Development Board for purposes of Section 99313. 


fb-)-For purposes of this chapter, the revenues allocated pursuant to this section shall be subject to 
the same requirements  as  revenues  allocated pursuant to  subdivisions (b)  and (c),  as  applicable, 
of Section 99312. 
(c) The  revenues  transferred  to  the  Public  Transportation  A.ecount  for  the  State  Transit 
Assistance Program that are attributable to  subdivision (a)  of Section 11053  of the-Revenue and 
Taxation  Gode  are  hereby  continuously  appropriated  to  the  Controller,  and,  upon  allocation 
pursuant to Sections 99313  and 99314, shall only be expended on the following: 
(1) Transit  capital  projects  or  services  to  maintain  or repair  a  transit  operator's  existing transit 
vehicle  fleet  or  existing  transit  facilities,  including  rehabilitation  or modernization  of existing 
vehicles or facilities. 
(2) The design,  acquisition,  and  construction of new vehicles  or facilities  that improve existing 
transit services. 
(3) Transit  services  that  complement  local  efforts  for  repair  and  improvement  of  local 
transportation infrastructure. 
(d) (1) Prior  to  receiving  an  apportionment  of  funds  pursuant  to  subdivision  (e)  from  the 
Controller  in  a  fiscal  year,  a  recipient  transit  agency  shall  submit. to  the  Department  of 
Transportation  a  list  of projects  proposed  to  be  funded  1vvith  these  funds.  The  list  of projects 
proposed to be funded v,ith these funds  shall include a description and location of each proposed 
project,  a  proposed  schedule  for  the  project's  completion,  and  the  estimated  useful  life  of the 
improvement.  The project list shall not limit the flexibility of a recipient transit  agency to  fund 
proj cots  in accordance with local needs  and priorities so  long as  the projects are  consistent with 
subdivision (c). 
(2) The  department  shall  report  to  the  Controller  the  recipient  transit  agencies  that  have 
submitted  a  list  of projects  as  described  in  this  subdivision  and  that  are  therefore  eligible  to 
receive an apportionment of funds  for the applicable fiscal  year.  The Controller, upon receipt of 
the report, shall apportion funds pursuant to Sections 99313  and 99314. 
(e) For  each  fiscal  year,  each  recipient  transit  agency  receiving  an  apportionment  of funds 
pursuant  to  subdivision  (c)  shall,  upon  expending  those  funds,  submit  documentation  to  the 
department  that  includes  a  description  and  location  of each  completed  project,  the  amount  of 
funds  expended  on  the  project,  the  completion  date,  and  the  estimated  useful  life  of  the 
improvement. 
(f) The audit of transit operator finances required pursuant to  Section 9924 5 shall verify that the 
revenues  identified  in subdivision  (c)  have  been  expended  in conformance  vlith  these  specific 
requirements and all other generally applicable requirements. 
SEC. 14. Section 99312.3  of the Public Utilities Code is repealed: 
99312.3. Revenues transferred to the Public Transportation Account pursuant to paragraph (2) of 
subdivision  (c)  of Section 6051.8  and paragraph (2)  of subdivision (c)  of Section 6201.8  of the 
Revenue and Taxation Gode are hereby continuously appropriated to the Transportation Agonoy 
for distribution in the follmving manner. 
(a) (1) Fifty  percent  of available  annual  revenues  under  tbis  section  shall  be  allocated  by  the 
Transportation A.gency to  the public  agencies,  including joint powers  agencies,  responsible  for 
state supported intercity rail services. A minimum of 25 percent of the funds  ar1ailable under this 
subdivision  shall  be  allocated  to  each  of the  state's  three  intercity  rail  corridors  that  provide 
regularly scheduled intercity rail service. 

(2) The Transportation Agency shall adopt guidelines governing the administration of the funds 

available  under  this  subdivision,  including  provisions  providing  authority  for  loans  of these 

funds by mutual agreement betv1een intercity rail service corridors. 

(b) (1) Fifty percent  of available  annual  revenues  under  this  section  shall  be  allocated  by the 

Transportation A.gency to  the publie-agen.e-i-es,including joint powers  agen-ei-es,-responsible  for 

commuter  rail  services.  For  the  2018  19  and  2019  20  fiscal  years,  20  percent  of the  funds 

available  under  this  subdivision  shall  be  allocated  to  each  of the  state's  five  commuter  rail 

service providers  that provide regularly scheduled  commuter rail  service.  Commencing July  1, 

2020,  the  funds  available  under  this  subdivision  shall  be  allocated  based  on guidelines  and  a 

distribution fonnula adopted by the Transportation A.gency. 

(2) On or before July  1,  2019, the Transportation A.gency  shall  prepare a  draft  of the proposed 

guidelines  and  distribution  fonnula  and  make them  available  for public  comment.  In preparing 

the proposed  guidelines-and  distribution  fonnula,  the  agency shall  consult with the  state's  five 

commuter rail  service providers.  The final  guidelines  and  distribution formula shall be adopted 

on or before January 1, 2020. The guidelines shall include, but need not be limited to, provisions 

providing authority for loans of these funds by mutual agreement between commuter rail service 

providers and providing for baseline allocations to each provider. 

(c) The  funds  made  available  by  this  section  may  be  used  for  operations  and  capital 

improvements. 

SEC. 15. Section 99312.4 of the Public Utilities Code is repealed: 

99312.4. Revenues  transferred to  the Public Transportation Acc9unt pursuant to  subdivision (a) 

of Section  11053  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Gode  for  the Transit  and  Intercity Rail  Capital 

Program-(Part 2 (commencing vlith Section 75220) of Division 44  of the Public Resources Gode) 

shall be available for appropriation to that program pursuant to the annual Budget Act. 

SEC. 16. Section 99314.9 of the Public Utilities Code is repealed: 

99314.9. The  Controller  shall  compute  quarterly  proposed  allocations  for  State  Transit 

A.ssistance  Program  funds  available  for  allocation pursuant to  Sections  99313  and  99314.  The 

Controller  shall  publish  the  allocations  for  each  eligible  recipient  agency,  including  one  list 

applicable to  revenues  allocated pursuant to  subdivision (c)  of Section 99312.1  and  another list 

for  revenues  allocated  from  all  other  revenues  in  the  Public  Transportation  Account  that  are 

designated for the State Transit Assistance Program. 

SEC. 17. Section 6051.8 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 

6051.8.  (a) Except as  provided by Section 6357.3,  in addition to the taxes imposed by this part, 

for  the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail  a  tax is hereby imposed upon all 

retailers  at the rate of 1.7 5 percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all  diesel 

fuel,  as  defined in Section 60022, sold at retail in this state on and after the operative date of this 

subdivision. 60022. 

(b) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a),  for  the  2011-12  fiscal  year  only,  the  rate  referenced  in 

subdivision  (a)  shall  be  1.87  percent. Except  as  provided by Section  6357.3,  in  addition to  the 

taxes  imposed  by  this  part  and  by  subdivision  (a),  commencing  November  1,  2017,  for  the 

privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail  a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers 

at  the rate  of 4 percent of the  gross  receipts  of any retailer  from  the  sale  of all  diesel  fuel,  as 

defined in Section 60022, sold at retail in this state. 

(c) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a),  for  the  2012-13  fiscal  year  only,  the  rate  referenced  in 

subdivision (a) shall be 2.17 percent. 


(d) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a),  for  the  2013-14  fiscal  year  only,  the  rate  referenced  in 
subdivision (a) shall be 1.94 percent. 
@(c)  (1)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b)  of Section  7102, except  as  otherwise  prmided  in 
aragraph  (2),  all  of the  revenues,  less  refunds,  collected  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be 
estimated  by  the  State  Board  of  Equalization,  with  the  concurrence  of the  Department  of 
Finance,  and  transferred  quarterly  to 
the  Public  Transportation  Account  in  the  State 
Transportation  Fund  for  allocation under  the  State  Transit  Assistance  Program  pursuant  to 
Section 99312.1  of the Public Utilities Code . 
.(:!)_~Subdivisions (a)  to  (e),  inclusive,  shall become operative on July  1,  2011. The rovenues, 
less refunds,  attributable to  a rate of 0.5  percent of the 4 percent increase in the rate pursuant to 
subdivision  (b),  amounting  to  one eighth  of revenues  from  the  increase  in  the  rate  under  that 
subdivision,  shall be estimated by the  State Board of Equalization,  with the  concurrence of the 
Department  of Finance,  and  transferred  quarterly  to  the  Public  Transportation  Account  in  the 
State  Transportation  Fund  for  allocation  by  the  Transportation  Agency  to  intercity  rail  and 
commuter rail purposes pursuant to  Section 99312.3 of the Public Utilities Gode. 
SEC. 18. Section 6201.8 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 
6201.8.  (a) Except as  provided by Section 6357.3,  in addition to the taxes  imposed by this part, 
an excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use,  or other consumption in this state of diesel 
fuel,  as  defined in Section 60022,  at the rate of 1.75 percent of the  sales price of the diesel fuel 
on and after the operative date of this subdivision . ..fueh 
(b) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a),  for  the  2011-12  fiscal  year  only,  the  rate  referenced  in 
subdivision  (a)  shall  be  1.87  percent. Except  as  provided by Section  6357.3,  in  addition to  the 
taxes imposed by this part and by subdivision (a), commencing November 1, 2017, an excise tax 
is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this state of diesel fuel,  as defined 
in Section 60022, at the rate of 4 percent of the sales price of the diesel fuel. 
(c) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a),  for  the  2012-13  fiscal  year  only,  the  rate  referenced  in 
subdivision (a) shall be 2.17 percent. 
(d) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (a),  for  the  2013-14  fiscal  year  only,  the  rate  referenced  in 
subdivision (a) shall be 1.94 percent. 
(e)  (c)  (1)  Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b)  of Section  7102, except  as  otherwise  provided  in 
paragraph  (2),  all  of the  revenues,  less  refunds,  collected  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be 
estimated  by  the  State  Board  of  Equalization,  with  the  concurrence  of the  Department  of 
Finance,  and  transferred  quarterly  to 
the  Public  Transportation  Account  in  the  State 
Transportation Fund for allocation pursuant to Section 99312.1  of the Public Utilities Code . 
.(fL~Subdivisions (a)  to  (e),  inclusive,  shall become operative on July  1,  2011.  The revenues, 
less refunds,  attributable to  a rate of 0.5  percent of the 4 percent increase in the rate pursuant to 
subdivision  (b),  amounting  to  one  eighth  of re:venues  from  the  increase  in  the  rate  under  that 
subdivision,  shall be estimated by the  State Board of Equalization,  vv'ith  the  concurrence of the 
Department  of Finance,  and  transferred  quarterly  to  the  Public  Transportation  Account  in  the 
State  Transportation  Fund  for  allocation  by  the  Transportation  Agency  to  intercity  rail  and 
commuter rail purposes p-...wsuant to Section 99312.3  of the Public Utilities Gode. 
SEC. 19. Section 7360 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 
7360. (a)  (1) A tax of eighteen cents ($0.18) is hereby imposed upon each gallon of fuel  subject 
to the tax in Sections 7362, 7363, and 7364. 
(2) If the federal  fuel  tax is  reduced below the rate of nine  cents  ($0.09)  per gallon  and federal 
financial  allocations  to  this  state  for  highway  and  exclusive  public  mass  transit  guideway 

purposes  are  reduced  or  eliminated correspondingly,  the tax rate  imposed by paragraph (1),  on 
and after the date of the reduction,  shall be recalculated by an amount so that the combined state 
rate under paragraph (1) and the federal tax rate per gallon equal twenty-seven cents ($0.27). 
(3) If any person or entity is exempt or partially exempt from the federal  fuel  tax at the time of a 

reduction, the person or entity shall continue to be so exempt under this section. 

(b) (1) On  and  after  July  1,  2010,  in  addition  to  the  tax  imposed  by subdivision  (a),  a  tax  is 

hereby imposed upon each gallon of motor vehicle fuel,  other than aviation gasoline,  subject to 

the tax in Sections 7362, 7363, and 7364 in an amount equal to seventeen and three-tenths cents 

($0.173) per gallon. 

(2) For  the  2011-12  fiscal  year  and  each  fiscal  year  thereafter,  the  board  shall,  on  or before 

March  1  of the  fiscal  year immediately preceding  the  applicable  fiscal  year,  adjust  the rate  in 

paragraph (1)  in that manner as  to  generate an  amount of revenue that will  equal the amount of 

revenue loss attributable to  the exemption provided by Section 6357 .7, based on estimates made 

by the board, and that rate shall be effective during the state's next fiscal year. 

(3) In order to maintain revenue neutrality for  each year, beginning with the rate  adjustment on 

or before  March  1,  2012,  the  adjustment  under  paragraph  (2)  shall  also  take  into  account  the 

extent  to  which  the  actual  amount  of revenues  derived  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  and,  as 

applicable,  Section  7361.1,  the revenue loss  attributable to  the  exemption provided by Section 

6357.7 resulted in a net revenue gain or loss for the fiscal year ending prior to the rate adjustment 

date on or before March 1. 

(4) The  intent  of paragraphs  (2)  and  (3)  is  to  ensure  that  the  act  adding  this  subdivision  and 

Section 6357.7 does not produce a net revenue gain in state taxes. 

~) Commencing July 1,  2019, the adjustments in paragraphs (2)  and (3) shall cease, and the rate 

imposed by this subdivision shall be the rate in paragraph (1). 

(c) On and after November 1,  201-'.7,--in-addition to the taxes imposed by subdivisions (a)  and (b), 

a  tax  is  hereby imposed  upon  each  gallon  of motor vehicle  fuel,  other  than  aviation  gasoline, 

subject to the tax  in Sections 7362, 7363,  and 7364, in an amount equal to  twelve cents ($0.12) 

per gallon. 

(d) On-July  1,  2020,  and  overy  July  1  thereafter,  the  board  shall  adjust  the  taxes  imposed  by 

S',,,,bdivisions  (a),  (b), and (c), •.vith the adjustment to apply to both to the base tax rates specified 

in those provisions and to any previous adjustment in rates made pursuant to this subdivision, by 

increasing the taxes  by a  percentage  amount  equal  to  the  increase  in  the  California  Consumer 

Price Index,  as  calculated by the Department of Finance with the resulting taxes rounded to  the 

nearest one  tenth of one cent ($0.01). The first adjustment pursuant to this subdivision shall be a 

percentage amount equal to the increase in the California Consumer Price Index from November 

1, 2017, to November 1,  2019.  Subsequent annual adjustments shall cover subsequent 12 month 

periods. The incremental change shall be added to the associated rate for that year. 

(e) Any increases  to  tbe  taxes  imposed under  subdivisions  (a),  (b),  and  (c)  that  are  enacted by 

legislation subsequent to  July  1,  2017,  shall be deemed to  be changes  to  the base tax rates  for 

purposes of the California Consumer Price Index calculation and adj',,,'.Stment performed pursuant 

to subdivision (d). 

SEC. 20. Section 7361.2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is repealed: 

7361.2. (a) For the  privilege  of storing,  for  the purpose  of sale,  each  supplier,  wholesaler,  and 

retailer owning 1,000 or more gallons of tax paid motor vehicle fuel on November 1, 2017, shall 

pay a storage tax, the rate of •.vhich shall be determined by the board pursuant to tbe difference in 

the rate of the tax on motor vehicle fuel  in effect on October 31, 2017, and the rate in effect on 


November  1,  2017,  on  tax paid  motor  vehicle  fuel  in  storage  according  to  the  volumetric 
measure thereof. 
(b) For purposes of this section: 
(1) "Ovming" means having title to the motor vehicle fuel. 
(2) "Retailer"  means  any  person  who  sells  motor  vehicle  fuel  in  this  state  to  a  person  v.410 
subsequently uses the motor vehicle fuel. 
(3) "Storing" includes the ovmership  or possession of tax paid motor vehicle fuel  outside of the 
bulk transfer/terminal  system,  including  the  holding  of tax paid  motor  vehicle  fuel  for  sale  at 
vvrholesale  or retail  locations  stored in a  container of any kind,  including railroad tank  cars  and 
trucks or trailer cargo tanks.  "Storing" also includes tax paid motor vehicle fuel  purchased from 
and invoiced by the seller,  and tax paid motor vehicle fuel  removed  from  a terminal  or entered 
into by a supplier, prior to the date specified in subdivision (a) and in transit on that date. 
(4) "Vlholesaler" means any person vv'l10  sells diesel fuel  in this state for resale to  a retailer or to 
a person vmo is not a retailer and subsequently uses the motor vehicle fuel. 
SEC. 21. Section 7653.2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is repealed: 
7653.2. On  or  before  January  1,  2018,  each  person  subject  to  the  storage  tax  imposed  under 
Section 7361.2 shall prepare and file  vlith the board, in a form prescribed by the board, a return 
shmving  the  total  nunilier  of gallons  of tax paid  motor  vehicle  fuel  ovmed  by the  person  on 
November  1,  2017,  the  alllount  of the  storage  tax,  and  any  other  information  that  the  board 
deems necessary for the proper administration of this part. The return shall be accompanied by a 
remittance payable to the board in the amount of tax due. 
SEC. 22. Section 8352.4 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 
8352.4. (a) Subject to Sections 8352 and 8352.1, and except as otherwise provided in subdivision 
(b ), there shall be transferred from the money deposited to  the credit of the Motor V chicle Fuel 
Account  to  the  Harbors  and  Watercraft  Revolving  Fund,  for  expenditure  in  accordance  with 
Division  1 (commencing with  Section 30)  of the Harbors  and Navigation Code,  the  sum  of six 
million six hundred thousand dollars ($6,600,000) per annum, representing the amount of money 
in  the  Motor  Vehicle  Fuel  Account  attributable  to  taxes  imposed  on  distributions  of motor 
vehicle fuel used or usable in propelling vessels.  The actual amount shall be calculated using the 
annual reports  of registered boats prepared by the Department of Motor Vehicles  for  the United 
States  Coast Guard  and the  formula and method of the December 1972 report prepared for  this 
purpose  and  submitted  to  the  Legislature  on  December  26,  1972,  by  the  Director  of 
Transportation.  If the  amount  transferred  during  each  fiscal  year  is  in excess  of the  calculated 
amount, the excess shall be retransferred from the Harbors and Watercraft Revolving Fund to the 
Motor Vehicle  Fuel  Account.  If the  amount  transferred  is  less  than  the  amount  calculated,  the 
difference  shall  be  transferred  from  the  Motor  Vehicle  Fuel  Account  to  the  Harbors  and 
Watercraft Revolving Fund. No adjustment shall be made if the computed difference is less than 
fifty  thousand  dollars  ($50,000),  and  the  amount  shall  be  adjusted  to  reflect  any  temporary  or 
permanent increase or decrease that may be made in the rate under the Motor Vehicle Fuel Tax 
Law.  Payments  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  made  prior  to  payments  pursuant  to  Section 
8352.2. 
(b) fl-)-Commencing  July  1,  2012,  the  revenues  attributable  to  the  taxes  imposed  pursuant  to 
subdivision (b) of Section 7360 and Section 7361.1  and otherwise to be deposited in the Harbors 
and  Watercraft  Revolving  Fund pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  shall  instead  be transferred  to  the 
General  Fund. The  revenues  attributable  to  the  taxes  imposed  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  of 

Section 7360  and  Section 7361.1  that were  deposited in the Harbors  and Watercraft Revolving 
Fund in the 2010-11  and 2011-12 fiscal years shall be transferred to the General Fund. 
(2) Commencing November  1,  2017, the revenues  attributable to  the taxes  imposed pursuant to 
subdivision (c) of Section 7360, any adjustment pursuant to  subdivision (d) of Section 7360, and 
Section  7361.2,  and  othenvise  to  be  deposited  in  the  Harbors  and  ::watercraft  Revolving  Fund 
pursuant to  subdivision (a),  shall instead be transferred to the State Parks and Recreation Fund to 
be used for state parks, off higlr.vay vehicle programs, or boating programs. 
SEC. 23. Section 8352.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 
8352.5. (a) (1) Subject  to  Sections  8352  and  8352.1,  and  except  as  otherwise  provided 
in paragraph  (1)  of subdivision (b),  there  shall  be transferred  from  the money deposited to  the 
credit  of the  Motor  Vehicle  Fuel  Account  to  the  Department  of Food  and  Agriculture  Fund, 
during the  second quarter of each fiscal  year,  an  amount  equal  to  the  estimate contained in the 
most recent report prepared pursuant to this section. 
(2) The amounts  are not subject to  Section 6357  with respect to  the  collection of sales  and use 
taxes thereon,  and represent the portion of receipts in the Motor Vehicle Fuel Account during a 
calendar year that were attributable to  agricultural  off-highway use of motor vehicle fuel  which 
is subject to refund pursuant to Section 8101, less gross refunds allowed by the Controller during 
the fiscal  year ending June 30th ~following the calendar year to persons entitled to refunds for 
agricultural off-highway use pursuant to Section 8101. Payments pursuant to this section shall be 
made prior to payments pursuant to Section 8352.2. 
(b) fl+-Commencing  July  1,  2012,  the  revenues  attributable  to  the  taxes  imposed  pursuant  to 
subdivision  (b)  of  Section  7360  and Section  7361.1  and  otherwise  to  be  deposited  in  the 
Department of Food and Agriculture Fund pursuant to  subdivision (a) shall instead be transferred 
to  the General  Fund. The revenues  attributable to  the taxes imposed pursuant to  subdivision (b) 
of  Section  7360  and  Section  7361.1  that  were  deposited  in  the  Department  of  Food  and 
Agriculture  Fund  in  the  2010-11  and  2011-12  fiscal  years  shall  be transferred  to  the  General 
Fund. 
(2) Commencing November  1,  2017,  the revenues  attributable to  the taxes imposed pursuant to 
subdivision  (c)  of Section  7360,  as  adjusted  pursuant  to  subdivision  (d)  of Section  7360,  and 
Section 7361.2 shall be deposited in the Department of Food and Agriculture Fund. 
(c) On  or before  September  30,  2012,  and  on or before  September  30  of each  even-numbered 
year  thereafter,  the  Director  of Transportation  and  the  Director  of Food  and  Agriculture  shall 
jointly prepare, or cause to be prepared, a report setting forth the current estimate of the amount 
of money in  the  Motor  Vehicle  Fuel  Account  attributable  to  agricultural  off-highway  use  of 
motor  vehicle  fuel,  which  is  subject  to  refund  pursuant  to  Section  8101  less  gross  refunds 
allowed by the Controller to persons entitled to refunds for agricultural off-highway use pursuant 
to Section 8101; and they shall submit a copy of the report to the Legislature. 
SEC. 24. Section 8352.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 
8352.6. (a) (1) Subject to Section 8352.1, and except as  otherwise provided in paragraphs (2) and 
(3),  on  the  first  day of every month,  there  shall  be transferred  from  moneys  deposited  to  the 
credit  of the  Motor Vehicle  Fuel  Account to  the  Off-Highway Vehicle  Trust Fund  created  by 
Section 38225 of the Vehicle Code an amount attributable to taxes imposed upon distributions of 
motor vehicle  fuel  used in the operation of motor vehicles  off highway and  for  which a refund 
has  not been  claimed.  Transfers  made pursuant to  this  section  shall  be made prior to  transfers 
pursuant to Section 8352.2. 

(2) W--.Commencing  July  1,  2012,  the  revenues  attributable  to  the  taxes  imposed  pursuant  to 
subdivision  (b)  of Section  7360  and Section  7361.1  and  otherwise  to  be deposited  in the  Off­
Highway Vehicle Trust Fund pursuant to paragraph (1) shall instead be transferred to the General 
Fund. The revenues attributable to the taxes imposed pursuant to subdivision (b)  of Section 7360 
and Section 7361.1  that were deposited in the Off-Highway Vehicle Trust Fund in the 2010-11 
and 2011-12 fiscal years shall be transferred to the General Fund. 
(B) Commencing November 1,  2017, the re:venues  attributable to  the taxes imposed pursuant to 
subdivision (c) of Section 7360, any adjustment pursuant to subdivision (d)  of Section 7360, and 
Section 7361.2, and othenvise to-be-deposited in the Off Highway Vehicle Trust Fund pursuant 
to  subdivision (a),  shall instead be transferred to the State Parks and Recreation Fund to be used 
for state parks, off highway vehicle programs, or boating programs. 
(3) The Controller shall withhold eight hundred thirty-three thousand dollars ($833,000) from the 
monthly transfer to the Off-Highway Vehicle Trust Fund pursuant to  paragraph (1),  and transfer 
that amount to the General Fund. 
(b) The amount transferred to the Off-Highway Vehicle Trust Fund pursuant to paragraph (1) of 
subdivision  (a),  as  a  percentage  of the  Motor  Vehicle  Fuel  Account,  shall  be  equal  to  the 
percentage transferred in the 2006-07 fiscal year.  Every five years, starting in the 2013-14 fiscal 
year,  the  percentage  transferred  may  be  adjusted  by  the  Department  of  Transportation  in 
cooperation with the Department of Parks and Recreation and the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Adjustments shall be based on, but not limited to, the changes in the following factors  since the 
2006-07 fiscal year or the last adjustment, whichever is more recent: 
(1) The  number  of vehicles  registered  as  off-highway motor  vehicles  as  required  by Division 
16.5 (commencing with Section 38000) of the Vehicle Code. 
(2) The number of registered  street-legal  vehicles  that  are  anticipated  to  be used  off highway, 
including four-wheel drive vehicles, all-wheel drive vehicles, and dual-sport motorcycles. 
(3) Attendance at the state vehicular recreation areas. 
(4) Off-highway  recreation  use  on  federal  lands  as  indicated  by  the  United  States  Forest 
Service's National Visitor Use Monitoring and the United States Bureau of Land Management's 
Recreation Management Information System. 
(c) It is  the intent of the Legislature that transfers  from  the Motor Vehicle Fuel  Account to  the 
Off-Highway  Vehicle  Trust  Fund  should  reflect  the  full  range  of motorized  vehicle  use  off 
highway  for  both  motorized  recreation  and  motorized  off-road  access  to  other  recreation 
opportunities.  Therefore,  the  Legislature  finds  that  the  fuel 
tax  baseline  established  in 
subdivision  (b),  attributable  to  off-highway  estimates  of use  as  of the  2006-07  fiscal  year, 
accounts  for  the three categories of vehicles that have been found  over the years  to be users  of 
fuel  for  off-highway  motorized  recreation  or  motorized  access  to  nonmotorized  recreational 
pursuits. These three categories are registered off-highway motorized vehicles, registered street­
legal motorized vehicles used off highway, and unregistered off-highway motorized vehicles. 
(d) It  is  the  intent  of the  Legislature  that  the  off-highway motor vehicle recreational  use  to  be 
determined by the Department of Transportation pursuant to paragraph (2)  of subdivision (b) be 
that usage by vehicles subject to  registration under Division 3 ( commencing with Section 4000) 
of the  Vehicle  Code,  for  recreation  or  the  pursuit  of recreation  on  surfaces  where  the  use  of 
vehicles registered under Division  16.5  (commencing with  Section 38000)  of the Vehicle  Code 
may occur. 
(e) In  the  2014-15  fiscal  year,  the  Department  of Transportation,  in  consultation  with  the 
Department  of Parks  and  Recreation  and  the  Department  of Motor Vehicles,  shall  undertake  a 

study to determine the appropriate adjustment to  the amount transferred pursuant to  subdivision 
(b)  and to update the estimate of the amount attributable to  taxes imposed upon distributions of 
motor vehicle fuel  used in the operation of motor vehicles  off highway and for  which a refund 
has  not been claimed.  The department shall  provide a  copy of this  study to  the  Legislature no 
later than January 1, 2016. 
SEC.  25. Chapter 6  ( commencing with  Section  11050)  of Part 5  of Division 2  of the Revenue 
and Taxation Code is repealed: 
CHAPTER 6. Transportation Improvement Fee 

11050. For purposes of this chapter, the follovling terms have the follovv'ing meanings: 

(a) "Transportation purposes" means both of the follovling: 
(1) The  research,  planning,  construction,  improvement,  maintenance,  and  operation  of public 

streets  and higw.vays  (and their related public facilities  for  nonmotorized traffic),  including the 

mitigation  of their  environmental  effects,  the  payment  for  property  taken  or  damaged  for  the 

foregoing purposes, and the administrative costs necessarily incurred in the foregoing purposes. 

(2) The  research,  planning,  construction,  improvement,  maintenance,  and  operation  of public 

transportation systems (and their related equipment and fixed  facilities),  including the mitigation 

of their  enviromnental  effects,  the  payment  for  property  taken  or  damaged  for  the  foregoing 

purposes, and the administrative costs necessarily incurred in the foregoing purposes. 

(b) "Transportatien  improvement  fee"  means  a  supplemental  charge  added  to  the  fee  imposed 

pursuant to Chapter 2 (commencing \vith Section 10751). 

(c) "Vehicle"  means  every  vehicle  that  is  subject  to  the  fee  in  Chapter  2  (commencing  'vVith 

Section 10751), except the following: 

(1) A commercial vehicle with an unladen v,reight of more than 10,000 pounds. 

(2) i\. vehicle exempted pursuant to the Vehicle Code from the payment of registration fees. 

(3) A  vehicle  for  which  a. certificate  of nonoperation  has  been  filed  'tvith  the  Department  of 

Motor Vehicles pursuant to  Section 4 604  of the Vehicle Code, during the period of time covered 

by the certificate. 

(4) A vehicle described in Section 5004  of the Vehicle Code. 

11051. (a) In addition to any other fee imposed on a vehicle by this code or the Vehicle Code,  a 

transportation improvement fee  is hereby imposed on each vehicle as  defined in subdivision (b) 

of Section 11050 effective on January 1, 2018, or as soon after that date as the department is able 

to  commence collection of the  fee.  The transportation improvement fee  shall be in the amounts 

specified in Section 11052. 

(b) The  department  shall  collect  the  fee  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  same  manner  as  the 

department collects the vehicle registration fee pursuant to  Section 9250 of the Vehicle Code. 

(c) The  fee  imposed  pursuant  to  this  chapter  is  imposed  for  the  privilege  of  a  resident  of 

California to operate upon the public highways a vehicle or trailer coach, the registrant of vmich 

is subject to the fee under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 10751). 

(d) The  revenues  from  the  transportation  improvement  fee  imposed  by  this  chapter  shall  be 

available for expenditure only on transportation purposes as provided in Section 11053. 

11052. (a) The  annual  amount  of the  transportation  improvement  fee  shall  be  based  on  the 

market  value  of the  vehicle,  as  determined  by  the  department  pursuant  to  Sections  10753, 

10753.2, and 10753.5, using the follovling schedule: 

(1) Vehicles 1.vith a vehicle market value range between zero dollars ($0)  and four thousand nine 

hundred ninety nine dollars ($4,999), a fee of twenty five dollars ($25). 


(2) Vehicles  with  a  vehicle  market  value  range  behveen  five  thousand  dollars  ($5,000)  and 

t\venty four thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($24,999), a fee of fifty dollars ($50). 

(3) Vehicles vlith  a vehicle market value range bet\veen twenty five  thousand dollars  ($25,000) 

and thirty four thousand nine hundred ninety nine dollars ($34,999), a fee of one hundred dollars 

($100). 

(4) Vehicles  with  a  vehicle  market  value  range  bet\veen  thirty five  thousand  dollars  ($35,000) 

and  fifty  nine  thousand  nine hundred  ninety nine  dollars  ($59,999),  a  fee  of one hundred  fifty 

dollars ($150). 

(5) Vehicles with a vehicle market value range of sixty thousand dollars  ($60,000)  and higher,  a 

fee of one hundred seventy five dollars ($175). 

(b) On  January  1,  2020,  and  every  January  1  thereafter,  the  department  shall  adjust  the 

transportation  improvement  fee  imposed  under  subdivision  (a)  by increasing the  fee  for  each 

vehicle market range in an amount equal to the increase in the California Consumer Price Index 

for the prior year,  except the first adjustment shall cover the prior hvo years, as calculated by the 

Department of Finance, v.rith  amounts  equal to  or greater than fifty  cents ($0.50) rounded to  the 

highest whole  dollar.  The incremental  change shall be added  to  the  associated  fee  rate  for  that 

ye&;­
(c) Any  changes  to  the  transportation  improvement  fee  imposed  in  subdivision  (a)  that  are 

enacted by the Legislature subsequent to  January 1, 2018, shall be deemed to be changes to  the 

base  fee  for  purposes  of  the  California  Consumer  Price  Index  calculation  and  adjustment 

performed pursuant to subdivision (b). 

11053. Revenues  from  the transportation imprw,,rement fee,  after  deduction of the  department's 

administrative  costs  related  to  this  chapter,  shall  be  transferred  by  the  department  to  the 

Controller for deposit as foll~ 

(a) Commencing  v.rith 
fifty  million  dollars 

($350,000,000), plus an annual increase for inflation as  determined in subdivision (b)  of Section 

11052  for  this  proportional  share,  shall  annually  be  deposited  into  the  Public  Transportation 

Account. The Cofl-troller shall, each month, set aside one twelfth of this amount, to accumulate a 

total  of three hundred fifty million dollars  ($350,000,000) in each fiscal  year or the appropriate 

adjusted  amount.  For  each  fiscal  year  commencing  with  the  2017  18  fiscal  year,  the  annual 

Budget Act shall include an appropriation for 70 percent of these revenues to be allocated to the 

Transit and Intercity Rail Capital Program (Part 2 (commencing with Section 75220) of Division 

44  of the Public Resources Gode), pursuant to Section 99312.4  of the Public Utilities Gode.  The 

remaining 30 percent of these revenues  shall be continuously appropriated to  the Controller for 

a-1-leeation  under  the  State  Transit  Assistance  program,  pursuant  to  subdivision  (c)  of Section 

99312.1  of the P'..,blic Utilities Gode. 

(b) Commencing 1vvith the 2017  18  fiscal  year, tvw hundred fifty million dollars  ($250,000,000) 

shall  annually  be  deposited  into  the  State  Highv,ray  i\.ccount  for  appropriation  by  the  annual 

Budget Act to  the  Congested Corridor Program created pursuant to  Section 2391  of the  Streets 

and Highways  Gode.  The---Gentroller  shall,  each month,  set  aside one h:velfth  of this  amount,  to 

accumulate a total of hvo hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000) in each fiscal year. 

(c) The remaining revenues after the transfers made in subdivisions (a) and (b) shall be deposited 

into  the Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Account created pursuant to  Section 2031  of the 

Streets and Highv.ray Code. 

SEC. 26. Section 60050 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read: 


three  hundred 

the  2017  18 

fiscal  year, 

I 

60050. (a) (1) A  tax  of eighteen  sixteen  cents ($0.18)  ($0.16)  is  hereby  imposed  upon  each 
gallon of diesel fuel  subject to the tax in Sections 60051, 60052, and 60058. 
(2) If the federal  fuel  tax is reduced below the rate of fifteen cents ($0.15) per gallon and federal 
financial  allocations  to  this  state  for  highway  and  exclusive  public  mass  transit  guideway 
purposes  are  reduced  or  eliminated  correspondingly,  the  tax  rate  imposed  by  paragraph .(11 
including  any reduction  or adjustment P-Ursuant  to  subdivision (b),  on and  after  the  date  of the 
reduction, fl-)--shall  be increased by an amount so  that the  combined state rate under paragraph 
(1) and the federal tax rate per gallon equal what it would have been in the absence of the federal 
reduction. 
(3) If any person or entity is exempt or partially exempt from the federal  fuel tax at the time of a 
reduction, the person or entity shall continue to be exempt under this section. 
(b) (ll_On July 1,  2011, the tax rate specified in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) shall be reduced 
to thirteen cents  ($0.13)  and every July 1 thereafter shall be adjusted pursuant to  paragraphs (2) 
and (3).  and after November 1,  2017, in addition to  the tax imposed pursuant to  subdivision (a), 
an  additional  taK  of t=v,renty  cents  ($0.20)  is  hereby  imposed  upon  each  gallon  of diesel  fuel 
subject to the tax in Sections 60051, 60052, and 60058. 
{2.)__fct-For the 2012-13  fiscal  year and each fiscal  year thereafter,  the board shall,  on or before 
March  1  of the  fiscal  year  immediately  preceding  the  applicable  fiscal  year,  adjust  the  rate 
reduction in paragraph (1)  in that manner as  to result in a revenue loss  attributable to paragraph 
(1) that will equal the amount of revenue gain attributable to  Sections 6051.8  and 6201.8, based 
on estimates made by the board,  and that rate shall be effective during the state's next fiscal  Gn 
July 1,  2020,  and  every July 1 thereafter,  the State Board of Equalization shall  adjust the taxes 
imposed by subdivisions  (a),  and  (b),  with the  adjustment to  apply to  both to  the base tax rates 
specified  in  those  provisions  and  to  any  previous  adjustment-----in  rates  1nade-pursuant  to-this 
subdivision,  by  increasing  the  taxes  by  a  percentage  amount  equal  to  the  increase  in  the 
California Consumer Price Index,  as  calculated by the Department of Finance •11ith  the resulting 
taxes rounded to  the nearest one tenth of one cent ($0.01).  The first  adjustment pursuant to this 
subdivision shall be a percentage amount equal to the increase in the California Consumer Price 
Index from November 1, 2017, to November 1, 2019. Subsequent annual adjustments shall cover 
subsequent  12 month periods.  The incremental  change shall be added to  the  associated rate  for 
that-year . 
.Q)_fd)--In  order to  maintain revenue neutrality for  each year, beginning with the rate adjustment 
on or before March 1, 2013, the adjustment under paragraph (2) shall take into account the extent 
to which the actual  amount of revenues  derived pursuant to  Sections 6051.8  and 6201.8  and the 
revenue loss  attributable to  this  subdivision resulted in a net revenue  gain or loss  for  the  fiscal 
year  ending  prior to  the rate  adjustment  date  on or before  March  1.  Any changes  to  the  taxes 
imposed under this  section that  are  enacted by legislation  subsequent to  July  1,  2017,  shall  be 
deemed to be changes to  the base tax rates for purposes of the California Consumer Price Index 
calculation and adjustment performed pursuant to paragraph (1). 
(4) The  intent  of paragraphs  (2)  and  (3)  is  to  ensure  that  the  act  adding  this  subdivision  and 
Sections 6051.8 and 6201.8 does not produce a net revenue gain in state taxes. 
SEC. 27. Section 60050.2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is repealed: 
60050.2. (a)  For the privilege of storing,  for  the purpose of sale,  each supplier, vmolesaler,  and 
retailer ovming 1,000 or more gallons  of tax paid diesel  fuel  on November  1,  2017,  shall pay a 
storage tax of twenty cents ($0.20) per gallon of tax paid diesel  fuel  in storage according to  the 
volumetric measure thereof. 

(b) For purposes of this section: 
(1) "Ovming" means having title to the diesel fuel. 
(2) "Retailer" means any person who sells diesel  fuel  in this  state to  a person ,vho  subsequently 
uses the diesel fuel. 
(3) "Storing"  includes  the  ovmership  or  possession  of tax paid  diesel  fuel  outside  of the  bulk 
transfer/terminal  system,  including  the holding  of tax paid  diesel  fuel  for  sale  at  wholesale-er 
retail locations stored in a container of any kind, including railroad tank oars and trucks or trailer 
cargo  tanks.  "Storing"  also  includes  tux  paid  diesel  fuel  purchased  from  and  invoiced  by the 
seller, and tax paid diesel fuel removed from a terminal or entered into by a supplier, prior to the 
date specified in subdivision (a) and in transit on that date. 
(4) "\Vholesaler" means any person ,vho sells diesel fuel  in this state for resale to  a retailer or to 
a person vmo is not a retailer and subsequently uses the diesel fuel. 
SEC. 28. Section 60201.4 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is repealed: 
60201.4. On  or before  January  1,  2018,  each person  subject  to  the  storage  tax  imposed under 
Section 60050.2 shall prepare and file vlith the board, in a form prescribed by the board, a return 
shmving the total number of gallons of tax paid diesel fuel mvned by the person on November 1, 
2017, the amount of the  storage tax,  and  any other information that the board deems necessary 
for  the  proper  administration  of this  part.  The  return  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  remittance 
payable to the board in the amount of tax due. 
SEC.  29. Article 2.5  (commencing with  Section 800)  of Chapter 4  of Division  1 of the Streets 
and Highways Code is repealed: 
Artiele 2.5. } ..dvanee Mitigation Program 
800. (a) The Advance Mitigation Program is hereby created to enhance communications behveen 

the department and stakeholders to protect natural resources through proj cot mitigation, to  meet 

or  exceed  applicable  environmental  requirements,  to  accelerate  project  delivery,  and  to  fully 

mitigate enviromnentul impacts from transportation infrastructure projects.  The department shall 

consult  on  all  activities  pursuant  to  this  article  with  the  Department  of Fish  and  V/ildlife, 

including activities pursuant to  Chapter 9  ( commencing vlith Section 1850) of Division 2 of the 

Fish and Game Code. 

(b) Commencing ·vvith  the  2017  18  fiscal  year,  and  for  a  period  of four  years,  the  department 

shall  set  aside  no  less  than  thirty  million  dollars  ($30,000,000)  annually  for  the  Advance 

Mitigation  Program  from  the  annual  appropriations  for  the  State  Transportation  Improvement 

Program  and  the  State  Highway  Operation  and  Protection  Program  for  the  planning  and 

implementation of projects in the Advanced Mitigation Program. 

(o) The  annual  Budget Act  and  subsequent  legislation may establish  additional  provisions  and 

requirements for the program. 

SEC. 30. Chapter 2  ( commencing with Section 2030) of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways 

Code is repealed: 

CH1"...PTER 2. Road l\tlaintenanee and Rehabilitation Program 
l,030. (a) The  Road  Maintenance  and  Rehabilitation  Program  is  hereby  created  to  address 
deferred maintenance  on the  state highv,ray  system and the local  street and  road  system.  Funds 
made  available by the .program  shall  be prioritized  for  expenditure  on basic road  maintenance 
and road rehabilitation projects, and on critical safety projects. 
(b) (1) Funds made available by the program shall be used for projects that include, but are not 
limited to, the follovling: 
(A) Road maintenance and rehabilitation. 

receiving 

funds  under 

the  program  shall  use  advanced 

(B)  Safety projects. 
(G) Railroad grade separations. 
(D) Complete street components, including active transportation purposes, pedestrian and bicycle 
safety  projects,  transit  facilities,  and  drainage  and  stormvmter  capture  projects  in  conjunction 
v,,rith  any other allov1able project. 
(E) Traffic control devices. 
(2) Funds  made  available  by the  pregram  may  also  be used  to  satisfy  a  match requirement  in 
order to obtain state or federal funds for projects authorized by this subdivision. 
(c) To  the  extent possible and  cost effective,  and  vmere  feasible,  the  department  and  cities  and 
counties  receiving  funds  under  the  program  shall  use  advanced  technologies  and  material 
recycling  techniques  that  reduce  the  cost  of  maintaining  and  rehabilitating  the  streets  and 
higlnvays,  and that  exhibit reduced  levels  of greenhouse gas  emissions  through material choice 
and construction method. 
(d) To  the extent possible and  cost  effective,  and  where  feasible,  the  department  and  cities  and 
counties 
technologies  and 
communications  systems  in  transportation  infrastructure  that  recognize  and  accommodate 
advanced automotive technologies that may include, but are not necessarily limited to,  charging 
or  fueling  opportunities  for  zero  emission  vehicles,  and  provision  of infrastructure to  vehicle 
communications for transitional or full autonomous vehicle systems. 
(e) To  the  extent  deemed  cost  effective,  and  vmere  feasible,  in the  context  of both the  project 
scope and the risk level for the asset due to global  climate change, the department and cities and 
counties receiving funds  under the program shall  include features  in the projects funded by the 
program to  better adapt  the  asset to  vlithstand the negative effects  of climate change and  malre 
the asset more resilient to impacts such as fires,  floods,  and sea level rise. 
(f) To the extent beneficial, cost effective, and practicable in the context of facility type, right  of 
v1ay,  project  scope,  and  quality  of  nearby  alternative  facilities,  and  vmere  feasible,  the 
department and cities and counties receiving funds under the program shall incorporate complete 
street elements into projects funded by the program, including, but not limited to,  elements that 
improve the  quality of bicycle  and pedestrian facilities  and that improve  safety for  all  users  of 
transportation facilities. 
(g) For purposes  of funds  directed tG-the  State Higlr.vay Operation and Protection Program,  the 
guidelines and reporting provisions shall be consistent 'vvith  Section  14526.5  of the Government 
Gede.­
(h) Guidelines adopted by the commission to facilitate the allocation of funds in the account shall 
be  exempt  from  the  A.dministrative  Procedure  A.ct  (Chapter  3.5  (commencing  with  Section 
11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Gode). 
2031. The  following  revenues  shall  be  deposited  in  the  Road  Maintenance  and  Rehabilitation 
A.ccount, vmich is hereby created in the State Transportation R.md: 
(a) Notwithstanding  subdivision (b)  of Section 2103  and pursuant to  subdivision (a)  of Section 
2103 .1,  the  portion  of the  revenues  in  the  Higlr.vay  Users  Tax  A.ccount  attributable  to  the 
increases in the motor vehicle fuel  excise tax pursuant to  subdivision (c)  of Section 7360  of the 
Revenue and Taxation Gode, as adjusted pursuant to subdivision (d) of that section. 
(b) The revenues from the portion of the transportation improvement fee pursuant to  subdivision 
(c) of Section 1105 3 of the Revenue and Taxation Gode. 
(c) The revenues  from  the increase in the vehicle registration  fee  purs11ant  to  Section 9250.6  of 
the Vehicle Gode, as adjusted purs11ant to subdivision (b) of that section. 

(d) Notmithstooding subdivt:o~~f the  revenues  attributab6~0:o  of the Revenue  and  Taxa

2103  and pUrsuantto p~rngrnp 

the  inorease  ' 

(b) of Seel!on 
(  ) 

,  , 
21G3  I  one  a 

f  Seetion 

.  '  , bdivisions  (b)  ande  o

(b)  of 8ect10n 

h (2) of subdivision 
·n  the  diesel  fuel 

" 

I 

l 

. 

f

, 
' fSUant  to  SU 

' 

,  ,  n from the Road 

excise tax l"r 
Gede. 

' 

4 

' ' 

,  g 

isled in the anl!t!ft 

habililalion Account -O 

, es designated fe,, the pro~~ shall coatain an "lll"?J>fla ,oe,

th4 have ilf!jlosed fees, 

nd Rehabihtal!on,6<-Oe 

(e) An~.::::ea1 year, the -~ B;!~~~:O,ts ofadminisre,i~•;!';;'!, ~s  providod in 
in the R-0ad Mamt=:d"veter llJJl!,"'',al of 17::on :879,67 of the Go":er shiilJ  eaeh 

2031.S. l'or e 
''enues depo-d 
Maintenano) :':id Redoducling the  amounts , : :~ 000' 000) of the remrum'.11'.i~'fer eo!B!lies that
':'.'.o hundred million douars  0~ shall be set aside aooua  including tmiffifm 
2032. (a) (1 
Seetion 203L5,h, 
C  de  wl!ieh 

f  n  improvemeoo!,  The  Cd  d million dollars 

hl!Ve  sought and  d  fined by suhdiv1s1on (b) o 
~ 
de"eleper fees  "'  e <f  4  d  solely lo  transporbH-0  He a total of two hun  re
lllJles  or  4'es d • 0  0 ne twelfth of this amoWr,  -O 
monJh set aS! 

($200,000,000),in1•-::;c~;'S:division shall ~n:a~:J~ut=·,vith or wi~!:t : : : : - ; .  
(2) Eligible PfOJ ec:uilt prior to  1987 withe~ '.'.'."u, i::. been deferred m;:'  o  OO!f!jlleled within
freeway  thats :rthe  eompletion  of the  '":er:ope summary report has  een 
the last,:o~ng Seetioo  13340 o:=y :m.,uously appropri':: :abilitation purposes

' 
"ailable  mder  thts 
G  "emtnenl  Code,  the  fund~  aval!oeetion  lo  eaeh 

,  d to  sound walls fe,, • 
y 

velnele  lane 
funding fe,, al  eas 

120 yellfB f!f!d  a nmse b,r 

,  ~ fiscal  year  are  e 

oat!  marntenance  • 

t  t  aeeumu • 

4'0  de  100 e 

t are inrute 

d" ,  n  rn  eao 

ant;·  -Of  r 

(3) Not,,1 

,  h 

~ 

I  , 

, 

1

, 

, 

l 

' 

, 

0

0

, 

t  stde one ~ e 

d 

t  • et Jl'l"Silll!l 

, 

, 

, 

,. 

eh fiscal year, 

inleru,nce 
10

oonually  fer  "*P 
and  eulvert  ma 
twelfth of this  amount, 
each fiscal yew-,, 

the  annual  Bi,gtr " 
month str Ir 
2017  18  fisoal 
, 
(a)  and  (b), begillfling  Ill  th;,all be available 
($100,000,0~0) ~~·the  amounts  llJ>llroprmted  : 
(e)  After  de~c!aunts alloca!ed in suhdm"~o  of the remaining re¥enues -ent fer bridge 

2031.5  '"'d th~ • d  million dollars  ($4 00,0,00,0b  , )the  Legislature,  by ~ depnth  set  aside  one 
yoor,  four hun  reenditu,e,  upon  appr<>pnal!on .Je Controller  shall  e-:; 1:""  ($400 000,000)  in
to  SeetiOfl 
,  1ie  annual  Budget Ael  pursu~ 2017  18 
slia!l  be 
(d) ~er :e:,oa;!,!1::a11"<Jareddi~i"':'~;~~'.':~.~~o; Of  th~ :em.~:gap;:::on by th~ 
lier shall each men! 
2031,  an 
fiscal  year,  t ''. 01~  to the State  Highway ;, •  petrol program, The Centro fi"e  million  dollllfS 
transferred ™"."  lement the freeway sep, iee , mulste  a  total  of  twenty 
LegislatUre,  to  supiflh 
ne tme 
set  as1  e  o  )  . vv 
($25,000,000  m ea 

and  rehab!lrtal!on, 
acOHfilillate  a  !<Hr 

!  l  of four ~ 

f  this  amount,  to  aeeu
O 

,  • eoount fer "*Pand!lure, u 

(b)  and  (o),  begrnmng"m, 

mounts  epprepnated, ill  t 

h  ndred million  e  ars 

"'enl , five  million 

eh fiscal year. 

,o  ar 

'd 

, 

' 

,

(b) For  each  fiscal  year,  each  city  or  county  receiving  an  apportionment  of funds  shall,  upon 
expending program funds,  submit documentation to  the  commission that includes  a description 
and  location  of  each  completed  project,  the  amount  of funds  expended  on  the  project,  the 
completion date, and the estimated useful life of the improvement. 
2036. (a) Cities  and  counties  shall m-aintai-n-their  existing commitment of local  funds  for  street, 
road,  and  highv1ay  purposes  in  order  to  remain  eligible  for  an  allocation  or  apportionment  of 
funds pursuant to Section 2032. 
(b) In  order  to  receive  an  allocation  or  apportionment  pursuant  to  Section  2032,  the  city  or 
county  shall  annually  expend  from  its  general  fund  for  street,  road,  and  highway purposes  an 
amount  not  less  than  the  annual  average  of its  expenditures  from  its  general  fund  during  the 
2009  10,  2010  11,  and  2011  12  fiscal  years,  as  reported to  the  Controller pursuant to  Section 
2151.  For purposes  of this  subdivision,  in  calculating  a  city's  or  county's  annual  general  fund 
expenditures and its average  general fund  expenditures for the 2009  10, 2010  11, and 2011  12 
fiscal  years, any unrestricted funds that the city or county may expend at its discretion, including 
vehicle in lieu tax  revenues  and revenues  from  fines  and· forfeitures,  expended  for  street,  road, 
and  highway  purposes  shall  be  considered  expenditures  from  the  general  fund.  One time 
allocations  that  have  been  expended  for  street  and  highvv'ay  purposes,  but  vlhich  may not  be 
available  on  an  ongoing basis,  inclu<ling  revenue provided under the Teeter Plan Bond Lavi  of 
1994  (Chapter 6.6  (commencing with  Section  54773)  of Part  1  of Division 2  of Title  5  of the 
Government Gode),  may not be considered 'vvhen  calculating a city's or county's annual general 
fund expenditures. 
(c) For any city incorporated after July 1,  2009, the Controller shall  calculate an  annual  average 
expenditure for the period betv1een July 1, 2009, and December 31, 2015, inclusive, that the city 
1.vas incorporated. 
(d) For  purposes  of subdivision  (b),  the  Controller  may  request  fiscal  data  from  cities  and 
counties in addition to  data provided pursuant to  Section 2151,  for  the  2009  10,  2010  11,  and 
2011  12 fiscal  years.  Each city and county shall furnish the data to the Controller not later than 
120 days after receiving the request. The Controller may withhold payment to cities and counties 
that do not comply with the request for information or that provide incomplete data. 
(e) The Controller may perform audits to  ensure compliance with subdivision (b)  1.vhen deemed 
necessary. Any city or county that has not complied with subdivision (b) shall reimburse the state 
for  the funds  it received during that fiscal  year.  i\.ny funds  withheld or returned  as  a result of a 
failure  to  comply with  subdivision  (b)  shall  be  reapportioned  to  the  other  counties  and  cities 
whose expenditures are in compliance. 
(f) If a  city  or  county  foils  to  comply v1ith  the  requirements  of subdivision  (b)  in  a  particular 
.fiscal  year, the city or county may expend during that fiscal  year and the following fiscal  year a 
total  amount that is not less than the total  amount required to be expended for those fiscal  years 
for purposes of complying v1ith subdivision (b). 
2037. A  city  or  county  may  spend  its  apportionment  of  funds  under  the  program  on 
transportation  priorities  other  than  those  allmvable  pursuant  to  this  chapter  if the  city's  or 
county's average Pavement Condition Index meets or exceeds 80. 
2038. The  California  \Vorkforce  Development  Board  shall  develop  guidelines  for  public 
agencies receiving Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Account funds  to participate in, itwest 
in,  or partner with,  new or existing preapprenticeship training programs  established pursuant to 
subdivision  (e)  of Section  14230  of the  Unemployment  Insurance  Code.  The  department  and 
local agencies that receive Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Account funds  pursuant to this 

chapter shall, not later than July 1, 2023, follov1  the guidelines set forth by the board. The board 
shall  also  establish  a  preapprenticeship  development  and  training  grant  program,  beginning 
January  1,  2019,  pursuant to  subdivision (e)  of Section  14230  of the Unemployment Insurance 
Gode.  Local  public  agencies  that receive  Road  Maintenance  and  Rehabilitation  Account  funds 
pursuant to this chapter are eligible to compete for such grants and may apply in partnership ·.vith 
other agencies and entities, including those vlith existing preapprenticeship programs.  Successful 
grant applicants shall, to the extent feasible: 
(a) Follmv the multicraft core curriculum implemented by the State Department of Education for 
its  pilot  project  with  the  California  Partnership  A.cademies  and  by  the  California  'Norkforce 
Development Board and local boards. 
(b) Include a plan for  outreach to  and  retention of women participants in the preapprenticeship 
program to help increase the representation of>.vomen in the building and construction trades. 
(c) Include  a  plan  for  outreach  to  and  retention  of minority  participants  and  underrepresented 
subgroups in the preapprenticeship program to  help  increase their representation in the building 
and construction trades. 
(d) Include  a  plan  for  outreach  to  and  retention  of disadvantaged  youth  participants  in  the 
preapprenticeship  program to  help  increase their  employment opportunities  in the building and 
construction trades. 
(e) Include  a  plan  for  outreach  to  individuals  in  the  local  labor  market  area  and  to  formerly 
incarcerated individuals to provide pathways to employment and training. 
(f) Coordinate with local  state approved  apprenticeship programs, local building trade  councils, 
and  to  the  extent  possible  the  California  Conservation  Gorps  and  certified  community 
conservation  corps,  so  individuals  v,rho  have  completed  these  programs  have  a  pathway  to 
continued employment. 
SEC. 31. Section 2103.l  of the Streets and Highways Code is repealed: 
2103.1. (a) Notwithstanding  subdivision  (b)  of Section  2103,  the  portion  of revenues  in  the 
Highv,ray  Users  Tax  Account  attributable  to  the  increases  in the motor vehicle  fuel  excise  tax 
pursuant  to  subdivision  (c)  of Section  7360  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  as  adjusted 
pursuant  to  subdivision  (d)  of that  section,  shall  be  transferred  to  the  Road  Maintenance  and 
Rehabilitation A.ccount pursuant to Section 2031. 
(b) Nohvithstanding  subdivision  (b)  of Section  2103,  the  portion  of revenues  in  the  Highv,ray 
Users  Tax  Account  attributable  to  the  increase  in  the  diesel  fuel  excise  tax  pursuant  to 
subdi•lision  (b)  of Section  60050  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  as  adjusted  pursuant  to 
subdivision (c) of that section, shall be transferred as follows: 
(1) Fifty percent to the Trade Corridors Enhancement Account pursuant to  Section 2192.4. 
(2) Fifty percent to the Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Account pursuant to  Section 2031. 
(c) Nohvithstanding subdivision (b)  of Section 2103, the portion of the revenues in the Highway 
Users  Tax  Account  attributable  to  the  storage  taxes  imposed  pursuant  to  Sections  7361.2  and 
60050.2  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Gode  shall  be  deposited  in  the  Road  Maintenance  and 
Rehabilitation Account created pursuant to Section 2031. 
SEC. 32. Section 2104 of the Streets and Highways Code is amended to read: 
2104. Notwithstanding  Section  13340 of the  Government Code,  a sum equal to  the net revenue 
derived  from .§:_l l .3  percent  of the  per  gallon  tax  of 2.035  cents  ($0.02035)  under  the  Motor 
Vehicle  Fuel  License  Tax  Law  (Part  2  (commencing  with  Section  7301)  of Division  2),  1.80 
cents  ($0.0180)  under  the  Use  Fuel  Tax  Law  (Part  3  (commencing  with  Section  8601)  of 
Division 2),  and 1.80  cents  ($0.0180L11.5  percent  of the per gallon  tax  under the  Diesel  Fuel 

Tax Law (Part 31  (commencing with Section 60001) of Division 2) of the Revenue and Taxation 
Code, shall be apportioned among the counties, as  follows: 
(a) Each county shall be paid one thousand six hundred sixty-seven dollars  ($1,667) during each 
calendar  month,  which  amount  shall  be  expended  exclusively  for  engineering  costs  and 
administrative expenses with respect to county roads. 
(b) A  sum  equal to the total of all reimbursable snow removal or snow grooming, or both,  costs 
filed  pursuant  to  subdivision  ( d)  of  Section  2152,  or  seven  million  dollars  ($7,000,000), 
whichever  is  less,  shall  be  apportioned  in  12  approximately equal  monthly apportionments  for 
snow removal or snow grooming, or both, on county roads, as provided in Section 2110. 
(c) A  sum  equal  to  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  ($500,000)  shall  be  apportioned  in  12 
approximately equal monthly apportionments, as provided in Section 2110.5. 
(d) (1) Seventy-five percent of the  funds  payable under this  section shall be apportioned  among 
the  counties  monthly  in  the  respective  proportions  that  the  number  of fee-paid  and  exempt 
vehicles  which  are  registered  in  each  county bears  to  the  total  number of fee-paid  and  exempt 
vehicles registered in the state. 
(2) For  purposes  of apportionment  under  this  subdivision,  the  Department  of Motor  Vehicles 
shall,  as  soon  as  possible  after the  last day of each calendar month,  furnish  to the  Controller a 
verified statement showing the number of fee-paid  and  exempt vehicles  which are registered in 
each county and in the state as of the last day of each calendar month as reflected by the records 
of the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(e) Of the remaining money payable, there shall be paid to each eligible county an amount that is 
computed monthly as  follows:  The number of miles of maintained county roads  in  each county 
shall be multiplied by sixty dollars ($60);  from the resultant amount, there shall be deducted the 
amount received by each county under subdivision ( d)  and the remainder, if any,  shall be paid to 
each county. 
(f) The  remaining  money  payable,  after  the  foregoing  apportionments,  shall  be  apportioned 
among the counties in the same proportion as the money referred to in subdivision ( d). 
(g) (1) Transfers of revenues  from  the Highway Users  Tax Account to  counties pursuant to this 
section collected during the months of March, April, May, June, and July of 2008, shall be made 
with the transfer of August 2008 revenues in September of 2008. This suspension shall not apply 
to a county with a population ofless than 40,000. 
(2) For the purpose  of meeting the  cash  obligations  associated  with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
county may make use of any cash balance in its county road fund,  including that resulting from 
the  receipt  of funds  pursuant to  the  Highway  Safety,  Traffic  Reduction,  Air  Quality,  and  Port 
Security Bond Act of 2006 (Chapter 12.49 ( commencing with Section 8879 .20) of Division 1 of 
Title 2  of the  Government  Code  (hereafter bond  act))  for  local  streets  and  roads  maintenance, 
during  the  period  of  this  suspension,  without  the  use  of  this  cash  being  reflected  as  an 
expenditure  of bond  act  funds,  provided  the  cash  is  replaced  once this  suspension  is  repaid  in 
September of 2008.  Counties may accrue the revenue received in September 2008  as repayment 
of these suspensions for the months of April, May,  and June of 2008 back to the 2007-08 fiscal 
year.  Nothing  in  this  paragraph  shall  change  the  fact  that  expenditures  must  be  accrued  and 
reflected from the appropriate funding sources for which the moneys were received and meet all 
the requirements of those funding sources. 
(h) (1) The transfer  of revenues  from  the  Highway Users  Tax  Account  to  counties  pursuant to 
this section that are  collected during the months of January, February, and March 2009, shall be 
made with the transfer of April 2009 revenues in May 2009. 

to 

in  addition 

(2) For the  purpose· of meeting  the  cash  obligations  associated  with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
county may make use of any cash balance in its  county road fund,  including that resulting from 
the  receipt  of funds  pursuant  to  the  Highway  Safety,  Traffic  Reduction,  Air  Quality,  and  Port 
Security Bond Act of 2006 (Chapter 12.49 (commencing with Section 8879.20) of Division 1 of 
Title 2  of the  Government Code  (bond  act))  for  local  streets  and roads  maintenance  during the 
period of this suspension, provided the cash is replaced once this suspension is repaid in May of 
2009. 
(3) This  subdivision  shall  not  affect  any  requirement  that  an  expenditure  is  required  to  be 
accrued and reflected from the appropriate funding source for which the money was received and 
to meet all the requirements of its funding source. 
SEC. 33. Section 2105 of the Streets and Highways Code is amended to read: 
2105. Notwithstanding  Section  13340  of  the  Government  Code, 
the 
apportionments prescribed by Sections 2104, 2106, and  2107, from  the revenues derived from  a 
per gallon tax imposed pursuant to  Section 7360  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation Code,  and  a per 
gallon tax imposed pursuant to  Sections 8651, 8651.5,  and  8651.6  of the Revenue and Taxation 
Code,  and  a per gallon tax  imposed pursuant to  Sections  60050  and  60115  of the Revenue  and 
Taxation Code, the following apportionments shall be made: 
(a) A  sum  equal  to  1.035  cents  ($0.01035)  5.8  percent  of the  per  gallon from  the  tax  under 
Section 7360 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,  11.5 percent of any per gallon tax in excess of 
nine  cents  ($0.09)  per  gallon  under  Sections  8651,  8651.5,  and  8651.6  of the  Revenue  and 
Taxation  Code,  and  1.035  cents  ($0.01035)  6.5  percent  of the  per  gallon from  the  tax  under 
Sections  60050  and  60115  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation Code,  shall be apportioned  among the 
counties, including a city and county. 
The  amount of apportionment to  each county,  including a  city and  county,  during  a fiscal  year 
shall be calculated as follows: 
(1) One  million  dollars  ($1,000,000)  for  apportionment  to  all  counties,  including  a  city  and 
county,  in proportion to  each county's receipts  during the prior fiscal  year under  Sections 2104 
and 2106. 
(2) One  million  dollars  ($1,000,000)  for  apportionment  to  all  counties,  including  a  city  and 
county, as  follows: 
(A) Seventy-five  percent  in  the  proportion  that  the  number  of fee-paid  and  exempt  vehicles 
which are registered in the county bears to the number of fee-paid and exempt vehicles registered 
in the state. 
(B) Twenty-five percent in the proportion that the number of miles of maintained county roads in 
the county bears to the miles of maintained county roads in the state. 
(3) For  each  county,  determine  its  factor  which  is  the  higher  amount  calculated  pursuant  to 
paragraph (1)  or (2) divided by the sum of the higher amounts for all of the counties. 
(4) The amount to  be apportioned to  each county is  equal to its factor multiplied by the amount 
available for apportionment. 
(b) A  sum  equal  to  1.035  cents  ($0.01035)  5.8  percent  of the  per  gallon from  the  tax  under 
Section 7360 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,  11.5 percent of any per gallon tax in excess of 
nine  cents  {$0.09)  per  gallon  under  Sections  8651,  8651.5,  and  8651.6  of the  Revenue  and 
Taxation  Code,  and  1.035  cents  ($0.01035)  6.5  percent  of the  per  gallon from  the  tax  under 
Sections  60050  and  60115  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  shall  be  apportioned  to  cities, 
including  a  city and  county,  in the  proportion that  the  total  population of the  city bears  to  the 
total population of all the cities in the state. 

(c) (1) Transfers ofrevenues from the Highway Users Tax Account to counties or cities pursuant 
to this section collected during the months of March, April, May, June, and July of 2008, shall be 
made with the transfer of August 2008 revenues in September of 2008. This suspension shall not 
apply to a county with a population ofless than 40,000. 
(2) For the purpose  of meeting the  cash  obligations  associated  with ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
city or county may make use  of any cash balance in the  city account that is  designated for  the 
receipt of state funds  allocated for local  streets and roads or the county road fund,  including that 
resulting  from  the  receipt  of funds  pursuant  to  the  Highway  Safety,  Traffic  Reduction,  Air 
Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of2006 (Chapter 12.49 (commencing with Section 8879.20) 
of Division  1 of Title 2 of the Government Code (hereafter bond act))  for local streets and roads 
maintenance, during the period of this suspension, without the use of this cash being reflected as 
an expenditure of bond act funds,  provided the cash is replaced once this suspension is repaid in 
September of 2008.  Counties  and cities may accrue the revenue received in September 2008  as 
repayment  of these  suspensions  for  the  months  of April,  May,  and  June  of 2008  back  to  the 
2007-08  fiscal  year.  Nothing in this  paragraph  shall  change the  fact  that  expenditures  must be 
accrued and reflected from the appropriate funding  sources  for which the moneys were received 
and meet all the requirements of those funding sources. 
(d) (1) The  transfer  of revenues  from  the  Highway  Users  Tax  Account  to  counties  or  cities 
pursuant to this section collected during the months of January, February, and March 2009  shall 
be made with the transfer of April 2009 revenues in May 2009. 
(2) For the purpose  of meeting  the  cash  obligations  associated with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
city or county may make use  of any cash balance in the  city account that is  designated  for  the 
receipt of state funds  allocated for local streets and roads or the county road fund,  including that 
resulting  from  the  receipt  of funds  pursuant  to  the  Highway  Safety,  Traffic  Reduction,  Air 
Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of 2006 (Chapter 12.49 (commencing with Section 8879.20) 
of Division  1  of Title  2  of the  Government  Code  (bond  act))  for  local  streets  and  roads 
maintenance,  during  the  period  of  this  suspension,  and  the  use  of this  cash  shall  not  be 
considered as  an  expenditure of bond act  funds,  if the  cash is  replaced when the payments that 
are suspended pursuant to this subdivision are repaid in May 2009. 
(3) This  subdivision  shall  not  affect  any  requirement  that  an  expenditure  is  required  to  be 
accrued and reflected from the appropriate funding source for which the money was received and 
to meet all the requirements of its funding source. 
SEC. 34. Section 2106 of the Streets and Highways Code is amended to read: 
2106. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the  Government Code,  a sum equal to  the net revenue 
derived from one and four one-hundredths cent ($0.0104) 5.3 percent of the per gallon tax under 
the Motor Vehicle Fuel License Tax Law (Part 2 (commencing with Section 7301) of Division 2 
of the Revenue and Taxation Code)  shall be apportioned monthly from the Highway Users Tax 
Account in the Transportation Tax Fund among the counties and cities as follows: 
(a) Four hundred dollars  ($400) per month shall be apportioned to  each city and city and county 
and  eight hundred  dollars  ($800)  per month  shall  be  apportioned  to  each  county  and  city  and 
county. 
(b) On the last day of each month, the sum of six hundred thousand  dollars  ($600,000)  shall be 
transferred  to  the  State  Highway  Account  in  the  State  Transportation  Fund  for  the  Active 
Transportation Program pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 2380). For each month 
in the 2013-14 fiscal  year that has passed prior to the enactment of the bill adding this sentence, 
six  hundred  thousand  dollars  ($600,000)  shall  be  immediately  transferred  from  the  Bicycle 

Transportation Account to  the  State Highway Account in the  State Transportation Fund for  the 
Active  Transportation  Program,  less  any  amount  already  expended  for  that  program  from  the 
Bicycle Transportation Account during the 2013-14 fiscal  year. 
(c) The balance shall be apportioned, as follows: 
(1) A base sum shall be computed for each county by using the same proportions of fee-paid and 
exempt vehicles as  are established for purposes of apportionment of funds under subdivision ( d) 
of Section 2104. 
(2) For each county, the percentage of the total assessed valuation of tangible property subject to 
local  tax  levies  within  the  county  which  is  represented  by the  assessed  valuation  of tangible 
property outside the  incorporated  cities  of the  county shall be applied  to  its  base  sum,  and  the 
resulting amount shall be apportioned to  the  county.  The assessed valuation of taxable tangible 
property,  for  purposes  of this  computation,  shall be that most recently used for  countywide tax 
levies  as  reported  to  the  Controller by the  State  Board of Equalization.  If an  incorporation  or 
annexation  is  legally  completed  following  the  base  sum  computation,  the  new  city's  assessed 
valuation shall be deducted from the county's assessed valuation, the estimate of which may be 
provided by the State Board of Equalization. 
(3) The  difference  between  the  base  sum  for  each  county  and  the  amount  apportioned  to  the 
county shall be apportioned to  the  cities  of that  county in the proportion that the population of 
each  city  bears  to  the  total  population  of all  the  cities  in  the  county.  Populations  used  for 
determining  apportionment  of money under  Section  2107  are  to  be used  for  purposes  of this 
section. 
(d) (1) Transfers ofrevenues from the Highway Users Tax Account to counties or cities pursuant 
to this section collected during the months of March, April, May, June, and July of 2008, shall be 
made with the transfer of August 2008 revenues in September of 2008. This suspension shall not 
apply to a county with a population ofless than 40,000. 
(2) For the purpose  of meeting the  cash  obligations  associated  with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
city or county may make use of any cash balance in the  city  account that is  designated  for  the 
receipt of state funds  allocated for local streets and roads or the county road fund,  including that 
resulting  from  the  receipt  of funds  pursuant  to  the  Highway  Safety,  Traffic  Reduction,  Air 
Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of 2006 (Chapter 12.49 (commencing with Section 8879.20) 
of Division  1 of Title 2 of the Government Code (hereafter bond act)) for local streets and roads 
maintenance, during the period of this suspension, without the use of this cash being reflected as 
an expenditure of bond act funds,  provided the cash is replaced once this suspension is repaid in 
September of 2008.  Counties and  cities may accrue the revenue received in September 2008  as 
repayment  of these  suspensions  for  the  months  of April,  May,  and  June  of 2008  back  to  the 
2007-08  fiscal  year.  Nothing in this  paragraph shall  change the fact  that  expenditures  must be 
accrued and reflected from the appropriate funding sources for which the moneys were received 
and meet all the requirements of those funding sources. 
(e) (1) The  transfer  of revenues  from  the  Highway  Users  Tax  Account  to  counties  or  cities 
pursuant to this section collected during the months of January, February, and March 2009, shall 
be made with the transfer of April 2009 revenues in May 2009. 
(2) For the purpose  of meeting the  cash  obligations  associated  with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
city or county may make use of any cash balance in the  city account that is  designated  for  the 
receipt of state funds  allocated for local streets and roads or the county road fund,  including that 
resulting  from  the  receipt  of funds  pursuant  to  the  Highway  Safety,  Traffic  Reduction,  Air 
Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of 2006 (Chapter 12.49 (commencing with Section 8879.20) 

of Division  1  of Title  2  of  the  Government  Code  (bond  act))  for  local  streets  and  roads 
maintenance,  during  the  period  of  this  suspension,  and  the  use  of  this  cash  shall  not  be 
considered as  an  expenditure of bond act funds,  if the  cash is  replaced when the  payments  that 
are suspended pursuant to this subdivision are repaid in May 2009. 
(3) This  subdivision  shall  not  affect  any  requirement  that  an  expenditure  is  required  to  be 
accrued and reflected from the appropriate funding source for which the money was received and 
to meet all the requirements of its funding source. 
SEC. 35. Section 2107 of the Streets and Highways Code is amended to read: 
2107. (a) Notwithstanding  Section  13340  of the  Government  Code,  a  sum  equal  to  the  net 
revenues  derived  from.!!_7.3  percent of the per gallon tax of 1.315  cents  ($0.01315)  under the 
Motor Vehicle Fuel  License Tax  Law  (Part 2 (commencing with Section 7301)  of Division 2), 
2.59  cents  ($0.0259)  under the  Use  Fuel  Tax  Law  (Part  3  (commencing with Section  8601)  of 
Division  2),  and  1.80  cents  ($0.0180)  11.5  percent  under  the  Diesel  Fuel  Tax  Law  (Part  31 
(commencing with  Section  60001)  of Division 2)  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  shall be 
apportioned monthly to  the  cities  and  cities  and  counties  of this  state  from  the  Highway Users 
Tax Account in the Transportation Tax Fund as provided in this section. 
(b) From the sum determined pursuant to subdivision ( a), the Controller shall allocate annually to 
each  city  that  has  filed  a report  containing  the  information  prescribed  by  subdivision  ( c)  of 
Section 2152,  and  that had  expenditures  in excess  of five  thousand  dollars  ($5,000)  during  the 
preceding  fiscal  year  for  snow  removal,  an  amount  equal  to  one-half  of the  amount  of its 
expenditures for snow removal in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000) during that fiscal  year. 
(c) The balance of the sum determined pursuant to subdivision (a)  from  the Highway Users Tax 
Account shall be allocated to each city, including city and county, in the proportion that the total 
population of the city bears to the total population of all the cities in this state. 
(d)  (1) For  the  purpose  of this  section,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  paragraph  (2),  the 
population  in  each  city  is  the  population  determined  for  that  city  in  the  manner  specified  in 
Section 11005.3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2) Commencing  with  the  ninth  fiscal  year  of a  city  described  in  subdivision  (a)  of Section 
11005.3  of  the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  the  sixth  fiscal  year  of  a  city  described  in 
subdivision (b) of Section 11005.3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and the 61st month of the 
city  described  in  subdivision  ( c)  of Section  11005 .3  of the  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  the 
population  in  each  city  is  the  actual  population  of that  city,  as  defined  in  subdivision  ( e)  of 
Section 11005.3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(e) (1) Transfers  of revenues  from  the  Highway  Users  Tax  Account  to  cities  pursuant  to  this 
section collected during the months of March, April, May,  June, and July of 2008, shall be made 
with the transfer of August 2008 revenues in September of 2008. 
(2) For the  purpose  of meeting  the  cash  obligations  associated  with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 
city may make use  of any cash balance in the  city account that is  designated  for  the receipt of 
state funds allocated for local streets and roads, including that resulting from the receipt of funds 
pursuant to the Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality,  and Port Security Bond Act of 
2006  (Chapter  12.49  (commencing  with  Section  8879.20)  of  Division  1  of  Title  2  of the 
Government  Code  (hereafter  bond  act))  for  local  streets  and  roads  maintenance,  during  the 
period of this  suspension, without the use of this  cash being reflected as  an expenditure of bond 
act  funds,  provided  the  cash  is  replaced  once  this  suspension  is  repaid  in  September  of 2008. 
Cities may accrue the revenue received in September 2008  as repayment of these suspensions for 
the  months  of April,  May,  and  Jtme  of 2008  back to  the  2007-08  fiscal  year.  Nothing  in  this 

paragraph  shall  change  the  fact  that  expenditures  must  be  accrued  and  reflected  from  the 
appropriate  funding  sources  for which the moneys were received and meet all the requirements 
of those funding sources. 
(f) (1) A  transfer  of revenues  from  the  Highway  Users  Tax  Account  to  cities  pursuant  to  this 

section collected  during the months  of January,  February,  and March 2009,  shall be made with 

the transfer of April 2009 revenues in May 2009. 

(2) For the  purpose  of meeting the  cash  obligations  associated  with  ongoing budgeted  costs,  a 

city may make use  of any cash balance in the  city account that is  designated  for  the receipt  of 

state funds  allocated for local streets and roads, including that resulting from the receipt of funds 

pursuant to  the Highway Safety,  Traffic Reduction,  Air Quality,  and Port Security Bond Act of 

2006  (Chapter  12.49  (commencing  with  Section  8879.20)  of  Division  1  of  Title  2  of the 

Government Code (bond act))  for local  streets  and roads  maintenance, during the period of this 

suspension, and the use of this cash shall not be reflected as  an expenditure of bond act funds, if 

the cash is replaced once this suspension is repaid in May 2009. 

(3) This  subdivision  shall  not  affect  any  requirement  that  an  expenditure  is  required  to  be 

accrued and reflected from the appropriate funding sources for which the moneys were received 

and to meet all the requirements of those funding sources. 

SEC. 36. Section 2192.4 of the Streets and Highways Code is repealed: 

2192.4. The Trade Corridor Enhancement Account is hereby created in the State Transportation 

Fund to receive funds  from subdivision (b) of Section 60050 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, 

as  adjusted.  Funds  in the  account  shall  be available  for  expenditure upon  appropriation by the 

Legislature for corridor based freight projects nominated by local agencies and the state. 

SEC.  37. Chapter  8.5  (commencing  with  Section  2390)  of Division  3  of  the  Streets  and 

Highways Code is repealed: 

CHA..PTER 8.5. Congested Corridors 
2390. The Solutions for Congested Corridors Program is hereby created. 
2391.  Pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  of Section  11053  of tho  Revenue  and  Taxation  Code,  r.vo 
hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000) in tho State Higlnvay A:ccount shall be available for 
appropriation to  the Department of Transportation in each annual  Budget Act for  the  Solutions 
for  Congested  Corridors  Program.  Funds made  available  for  the program shall  be  allocated by 
the  California  Transportation  Commission  to  projects  designed  to  achieve  a  balanced  set  of 
transportation,  environmental,  and  community  access  improvements  within  highly  congested 
travel  corridors  throughout the  state.  Funding shall be available  for projects  that make specific 
performance  improvements  and  are  part  of a  comprehensive  corridor  plan  designed  to  reduce 
congestion in highly trav:eled  corridors  by providing more transportation  choices  for  residents, 
commuters,  and  visitors  to  the  area  of the  corridor vmile preserving  the  character  of the  local 
community  and  creating  opportunities  for  neighborhood  enhancement  projects.  In  order  to 
mitigate increases  in vehicle  miles  traveled,  greenhouse  gases,  and  air pollution,  highv1ay lane 
capacity increasing projects  funded by this program shall be limited to  high occupancy vehicle 
lanes,  managed  lanes  as  defined  in  Section  14106  of the  Government  Code,  and  other  non 
general purpose lane improvements primarily designed to improve safety for all modes of travel, 
such as  auxiliary lanes, truck climbing lanes, or dedicated bicycle lanes.  Project elements within 
the  corridor plans may include improvements to  state highways,  local  streets  and roads,  public 
transit  facilities,  bicycle  and  pedestrian  facilities,  and  restoration  or  preservation  work  that 
protects critical local habitat or open space. 

2392.  A  regional  transportation  planning  agency  or  county  transportation  comm1ss10n  or 
authority  responsible  for  preparing  a  regional  transportation  improvement  plan  under  Section 
14 527 of the Government Code or the department may nominate projects for funding through the 
program that are consistent vlith the policy objectives of the program as  set forth in this chapter. 
The commission shall allocate no more than one half of the funds  available each year to projects 
nominated  exclusively  by  the  department.  Preference  shall  be  given  to  corridor  plans  that 
demonstrate that the plans and the specific project improvements to be undertaken are the result 
of  collaboration  betv,reen  the  department  and  local  or  regional  partners  that  reflect  a 
comprehensive approach to  addressing  congestion  and  quality of life  issues  within the  affected 
corridor through investment in transportation and related environmental solutions.  Collaboration 
betv,reen  the  partners  may  be  demonstrated  by  a  project  being jointly  nominated  by both  the 
regional agency and the department. 
2393. A  project  nomination  shall  include  documentation  regarding  the  quantitative  and 
qualitative  measures  validating  the  project's  consistency  with  the  policy  objectives  of  the 
program as  set forth in this  chapter.  In addition to being included in a corridor plan, a nominated 
project  shall  also  be  included  in  the  region's  regional  transportation  plan.  Projects  1vvithin  the 
boundaries  of a  metropolitan  planning  organization  must  be  included  in  an  adopted  regional 
transportation plan that includes a sustainable communities strategy determined by the State Air 
Resources Board to achieve the region's greenhouse gas emissions red~ction targets. 
2394. The commission shall allocate program funds to projects after reviewing the corridor plans 
submitted by the regional agencies or the department and making a determination that a proposed 
project is  consistent vv'ith the objectives of the corridor plan.  In addition to making a consistency 
determination  with  respect  to  project  nominations,  the  commission  shall  score  the  proposed 
projects on the follw.ving criteria: 
(a)  Safety. 
(b) Congestion. 
(c) Accessibility. 
(d) Economic development and job creation and-retenti-on, 
(e) Furtherance  of  state  and  federal  ambient  air  standards  and  greenhouse  gas  em1ss10ns 
reduction standards pursuant to  the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006  (Division 
25.5  (commencing  vlith  Section  38550)  of the  Health  and  Safety  Code)  and  Senate  Bill  375 
(Chapter 728  of the Statutes of 2008t,­
(f) Efficient land use. 
(g) Matching funds. 
(h) Project deliverability. 
2395. The commission shall adopt an initial program of projects to be funded through the initial 
appropriation for  the program.  The initial program may cover a multiyear programming period. 
Subsequent programs  of projects  shall  be  adopted on a biennial basis  consistent 1vvith  available 
funds for the program, and may include updates to programs of projects previously adopted. 
2396. The  commission,  in  consultation v1ith  the  State  Air  Resources  Board,  shall  develop  and 
adopt  guidelines  for  the  program  consistent  with  the  requirements  of this  chapter.  Guidelines 
adopted by the commission shall be exempt from the Administrative Procedure Act (Chapter 3.5 
(commencing with  Section  11340)  of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2  of the  Government Code). 
Prior  to  adopting  the  guidelines,  the  commission  shall  conduct  at  least  one  public  hearing  in 
northern  California  and  one  public  hearing  in  southern  California  to  reviev,r  and  provide  an 
opportunity for public comment. The commission shall adopt the final  guidelines no  sooner than 

30  days  after the  commission provides  the proposed guidelines  to  the  Joint  Legislative  Budget 
Committee and the transportation policy committees in the Senate and the Assembly. 
2397. On or before March 1, 2019, and annually thereafter, the commission shall provide project 
update reports  on the development and implementation of the program described in this  chapter 
in  its  annual  report  to  the  Legislature  prepared  pursuant  to  Section  14535  of-the  Government 
Code.  A  copy of the report shall be provided to the Joint Legislative Budget Committee and the 
transportation policy c01mnittees  of both houses  of the  Legislature.  The report,  at  a minimum, 
shall include information on each project that received funding under the prqgram, including, but 
not limited to, all  of the following: 
(a) A summary describing the overall progress of the project since the initial award. 
(b) Expenditures to date for all project phase costs. 
(c) A  summary  of milestones  achieved  during  the  prior  year  and  milestones  expected  to  be 
reached in the coming year. 
(d) An assessment of hmv  the project is meeting the  quantitative  and  qualitative measurements 
identified in the project nomination, as outlined in Section 2393. 
SEC. 38. Section 4156 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read: 
4156. (a) Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  code,  and  except  as  provided  in 
subdivision  (b ),  the  department  in  its  discretion  may  issue  a  temporary  permit  to  operate  a 
vehicle when a payment of fees has been accepted in an amount to be determined by, and paid to 
the  department,  by the  owner  or  other  person  in  lawful  possession  of the  vehicle.  The permit 
shall  be subject to  the tenns  and  conditions,  and  shall  be valid  for  the period of time,  that the 
department shall deem appropriate under the circumstances. 
(b) (1) The department shall not issue a temporary permit pursuant to subdivision (a) to operate a 
vehicle  for  which  a  certificate  of compliance  is  required  pursuant  to  Section  4000.3,  and  for 
which that certificate of compliance has not been issued, unless the department is  presented with 
sufficient evidence,  as  detennined by the department, that the vehicle has failed  its  most recent 
smog check inspection. 
(2) Not more  than  Gflly-one  temporary permit may be issued  pursuant to  this  subdivision to  a 
vehicle owner in a two-year period. 
(3) A  temporary  pennit  issued  pursuant  to  paragraph  (1)  is  valid  for  either  60  days  after  the 
expiration of the registration of the vehicle or 60 days after the date that vehicle is removed from 
nonoperation, whichever is applicable at the time that the temporary permit is issued. 
(4) A temporary permit issued pursuant to paragraph (1) is subject to Section 9257.5. 
(c) (1) The department  may issue  a  temporary  permit pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  to  operate  a 
vehicle for which registration may be refused pursuant to Section 4000.15. 
(2) Only one temporary permit may be issued pursuant to this subdivision for any vehicle, unless 
othervAse approved by the State Air Resources Board. 
(3) A  temporary permit  issued  pursuant  to  paragraph  (1)  is  valid  for  either  90  days  after  the 
expiration of the registration of the vehicle or 90 days after the date that vehicle is removed from 
nonoperation, 1vvhichever is applicable at the time the temporary permit is issued. 
(4) A temporary permit issued pursuant to paragraph (1) is subject to Section 9257.5. 
SEC. 39. Section 9250.6 of the Vehicle Code is repealed: 
9250.6. (a) In  addition  to  any  other  fees  specified  in  this  code,  or  the  Revenue  and  Taxation 
Code, commencing July 1, 2020, a road improvement fee of one hundred dollars ($100)  shall be 
paid  to  the department for  registration  or renewal  of registration  of every zero  emission motor 

vehicle  model  year  2020  and  later  subject  to  registration  under  this  code,  except  those  motor 
vehicles that are expressly exempted urider this code from payment of registration fees. 
(b) On January 1,  2021,  and every January 1 thereafter, the Department of Motor Vehicles shall 
adjust  the  road  improvement  foe  imposed  under  subdivision  (a)  by  increasing  the  fee  in  an 
amount equal to  the increase in the  Californi-a-Gensumer Price  Index  for  the prior year,  except 
the first adjustment shall cover the-j3rior six months, as  calculated by the Department of Finance, 
\Vith amounts equal to or greater than fifty cents ($0.50) rounded to  the highest whole dollar. The 
incremental change shall be added to the associated fee rate for that year. 
(e) Any  changes  to  the  road  improvement  fee  imposed by subdivision  (a)  that  are  enacted  by 
legislation  subsequent to  July  1,  2017,  shall  be  deemed  to  be  changes  to  the base  fee  rate  for 
purposes of the California Consumer Price Index calcx1lation and adjustment performed pursuant 
to subdivision (b). 
(d) Revenues from the road improvement fee,  after deduction of the department's administrative 
costs  related  to  this  section,  shall  be  deposited  in  the  Road  Maintenance  and  Rehabilitation 
Account created pursuant to  Section 2031  of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(e) This section does not apply to a commercial motor vehicle subject to  Section 9400.1. 
(f) The  road  improvement  fee  required  pursuant  to  this  section  does  not  apply  to  the  initial 
registration after the purchase of a new zero  emission motor vehicle. 
(g) For  purposes  of this  section,  "zero  emission  motor  vehicle"  means  a  motor  vehicle  as 
described in subdivision (d) of Section 44258 of the Health and Safety Code, or any other motor 
vehicle that is able to operate on any fuel other than gasoline or diesel fuel.  . 
SEC.  40. (a)  The  Institute  for  Transportation  Studies  at  the  University  of California,  Davis  is 
requested  to  suspend  its  report  to  the  Governor  and  the  Legislature  that  was  requested  in  the 
Road Repair and Accountability Act of 2017. 
(b)  The  Institute  shall  not  consult  with  the  State  Air  Resources  Board,  the  Department  of 
Transportation,  the  Department  of Motor  Vehicles,  and  the  State  Board  of Equalization  to 
prepare the report requested in the Road Repair and Accountability Act of 2017. 
SEC.  41.  Guidelines  adopted by the California Transportation Commission, the Department  of 
Transportation, the Transportation Agency, or any other state agency to implement transportation 
programs in the Road Repair and Accountability Act of 2017 are hereby repealed. 

