HOWARD JARVIS,  Founder (1903-1986) 

JON COUPAL, President 

TREVOR GRIMM, General Counsel 


TIMOTHY BITTLE, Director of Legal Affairs 

HOWARD JARVIS 

TAXPAYERS  ASSOCIATION 

Ashley Johansson 

Initiative Coordinator 

Attorney General's Office 
P.O. Box 994255 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

17-0032 


SACRAMENTO OFFICE:
921  11th Street, Suite 1201 


Sacramento, CA 95814 

(916) 444-9950, Fax:(916) 444-9823 

www.hjta.org

September 12, 2017 

RECEIVED 

SEP  1 3 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GF.NERAL'S OFFICE 

Re:  Homeowners and Renters Tax Credit Act of 2018 

Dear Ms.  Johansson: 

By this letter, I respectfully request the Attorney General to prepare a title and 
summary of the chief purpose and points of the California Homeowners and 
Renters Tax Credit Act of 2018, a copy of which is attached. I have also included 
with this letter the required signed statement pursuant to  California Elections Code 
sections 9001  and 9608, and a check in the amount of $2000.  My address as  a 
registered to  vote is shown on Attachment 'A' to this letter. 

Any correspondence regarding this initiative should be directed to me at Howard 
Jarvis Taxpayers Association, 921  Eleventh Street, Suite 1201, Sacramento, CA 
95814 (916.444.9950). 

Thank you for your cooperation. 

Sincerr,J 

Jon Cpal, President 
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association 

1  7- 0032 


THE HOMEOWNERS AND RENTERS TAX CREDIT ACT OF 2018 

SECTION 1.  Declaration of Findings and Statement of Purpose 

A. 	 The cost of housing in California is a crisis that demands immediate action. Cun-ently, 

California is building only half of the 180,000 housing units we amrnally need simply to keep 
pace with demand. 

B. 	 The dream of home ownership and the ability to create middle-class wealth is out ofreach for 

many of our citizens. One-third of California residents cannot afford a median priced home. 
A median priced home in the state is cun-ently 200 percent higher than the national average. 
C. 	 For those who choose to rent, they are finding it harder and harder to  find affordable housing 

in locations close to where they work or where their children can attend a quality school. 
One-third of California renters spend at least half of their take-home pay on housing. 

D. 	 Despite this, state and local politicians continue to pile on new taxes, fees, bond debt, and 

assessments on homeowners and apartment owners, who pass these costs on to their tenants 

E. 	 California remains one of the most heavily taxed states in Ame1ica.  State and local 

government revenue increases have far exceeded both inflation and population growth. 

F. 	 In 1974, voters approved a homeowner' s prope1iy tax exemption and authorized the 

Legislature to increase that exemption to keep up with the price of homes.  Not one increase 
has been approved by the Legislature.  The amount is just $70 per year for homeowners. 

G. 	 In 1991, a tax credit for renters was created and the Legislature was authorized to increase 

the credit amount to keep up with the cost of rental housing.  Not one increase has been 
approved by the Legislature.  That amount is just $60 per year for many renters. 

H. 	 Therefore, the People hereby enact the "Homeowners and Renters Tax Credit Act of 2018" 

to provide an amrnal $500 tax credit for every homeowner and renter in California and to 
require that credit to increase to maintain pace with the cost of housing. 

SECTION 2.  Homeowners and Renters Tax Credit Act of2018 

Section 17053 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is added to read: 

ยง 17053(a)(l)  For a qualified homeowner and renter, there shall be allowed a credit of $500 
against his or her "net tax," as defined in Section 17039. 

(2)  Marlied couples residing in the same place of residence shall receive but one credit under 
this section, except that if each spouse files a separate return, the credit may be taken by either or 
equally divided between them 

(3)  Marlied couples, where each maintained a separate place of residence and resided in this 
state during the entire taxable year, shall receive one-half the full  credit allowed to married 
persons provided in subdivision (a). 

(b) For purposes of this section, a "qualified homeowner" means an individual who is eligible for 
the homeowner ' s property tax exemption pursuant to subdivision (k) of Section 3 of Aiiicle XIII 
of the Constitution and section 218 of this Code. 

(c) For purposes of this section, a "qualified renter" means an individual who, without regard to 
income, is eligible for the tax credit pursuant to section 17053.5. 

(d)  An otherwise qualified homeowner or renter who is a nomesident for any pmiion of the 
taxable year shall claim the credits set fo1ih in subdivision (a) at the rate of one-twelfth of those 
credits for each full month that individual resided within this state during the taxable year. 

(e) A person claiming the credit provided in this section shall, as pmi of that claim, and under 
penalty of pe1jury, furnish the necessary infonnation as the Franchise Tax Board prescribes on a 
fonn supplied by the board. 

(f) The credit provided in this section shall be claimed on returns in the fonn as the Franchise 
Tax Board may from time to time prescribe. 

(g) For each taxable year after enactment of this section, the Franchise Tax Board shall adjust the 
tax credit set fmih in subdivision (a) by an amount equal to the percentage change in the 
California Consumer Price Index for all  items during the p1ior calendar year, as reported by the 
Department of Indust1ial Relations. 

SECTION 3.  General Provisions 

(a)  If  any  provision  of  this  Act,  or  paii  thereof,  is  for  any  reason  held  to  be  invalid  or 
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force  and 
effect, and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable. 

(b) This Act is intended to be comprehensive.  It is the intent of the People that in the event this 
Act and measures relating to the same subject appear on the same statewide election ballot, the 
provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this Act.  In 
the event that this Act receives a greater number of affinnative votes, the provisions of this Act 
shall prevail in their entirety, and all provisions of the other measure or measures shall be null 
and void. 

