17-0002 


RECEIVED 

FEB  2 2 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

John  Cox 

P.O.  Box 3848 

Rancho Santa Fe,  CA  92067 

February 

, 2017 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
P.O. Box 994255 
Sacramento, CA  942.44-25550 

Re: 	

Request for Title and Summary for Proposed Initiative 
"The Low Cost New Hampshire-Style Neighborhood Legislature Act" 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

Pursuant to Article II,  Section 10( d) of the California Constitution, I am submitting the 

attached proposed statewide ballot measure to your office and request that you prepare a 
circulating title and summary of the measure as provided by law. 

Included with this letter are the following: 


- Statement signed by proponent pursuant to California Elections Code sections 9001 

and 9608; 

- Proponent's address as registered to vote is shown on Attachment 'A'; and 

- A check in the amount of $2,000. 


Thank you for your time and attention to this important matter.  Should you have any 
questions or require additional information, please contag the  undersigned at (847) 274-8814. 

Ve ry  T ru l y  You r s ,  

/?

' 

,\ 

John Cox 

) 

.....,__~n•••_......, 

17-0002 


INITIATIVE MEASURE TO BE SUBMITTED TO VOTERS 

SECTION 1.  DECLARATION OF FINDINGS 

· 

 

A.  Special interest money has a corrupting influence on our state legislature. The promise of a 
quality education, thriving business environment, low cost of living and affordable housing have 
all suffered greatly in recent years as a result. 
B.  The state legislature has also repeatedly increased its own budget, despite failing to meet the· 
real needs of the people of California. At the same time, the salaries of legislators have been 
raised repeatedly, far  above the median family income in  California. 
C.  Our legislative districts are so large that it takes more and more money to run election 
campaigns, with legislators spending more and more time raising campaign money.  Qualified, 
interested; independent and experienced persons often don't run for the legislature due to the 
huge fundraising and campaign time demands required. 
D.  The solution is to divide each of our bloated 120 legislative districts into  100 Neighborhood 
districts so that a legislator will once again represent his or her neighbors. New Hampshire has a 
system like this and it works well.  The districts are so small 
campaign for office. Most candidates  are n.ot professional politicians and voter turnout is among 
the highest in the nation.  Its Legislature routinely produces on-time, balanced budgets. 
E.  Voter participation has dropped in California as more and more voters become convinced that 
their voices are being drowned out by the power of special interest money. 

that it only costs about $600 to 

SECTION 2.  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 

A.  The cost of operating the state legislature must be reduced, including the salaries of 
legislators who are paid far more than the median income of typical California families. 
B.  Each of the current 120 legislative districts must be divided into  100 neighborhood districts 
so that Legislators represent the interests of their neighbors and not special interest donors. These 
reforms will reduce overall costs, even though the number of those serving in theJegislature as 
neighborhood legislators will increase.  As. in New Hampshire, serving in the legislature will 
once again become an opportunity for public service rather than a job for career politicians. 
C.  Neighborhood legislators will meet in local regions to select 80 of their number to  go.to 
Sacramento as part ofthe Working Group for the Assembly, as well as 40 of their number to 
serve as the Working Group for the Senate. 

Therefore, the people hereby enact "The Low Cost New Hampshire-Style  Neighborhood· 
Legislature Act." 

SECTION 3.  THE LOW COST NEW HAMPSHIRE-STYLE NEIGHBORHOOD 
LEGISLATURE ACT 

Sections 1, 2,  3, 6, and 7.5  of Article IV are hereby amended,  and section 9.5  of Article IV  is 
hereby added to the California Constitution to read as follows (additions shown in underline type 
and deletions shown in strikeout typo): 

Sec.  1.  The legislative power of this State is vested in the California Legislature which consists 
of neighborhood representatives elected to the Senate and Assembly; but the people reserve to 
themselves the powers of initiative and referendum. 

Sec. 2.  (a)(l)The Senate shall be comprised ofrepresentatives from neighborhood districts. as 
provided in section 6.  has a membership of 400 Senators shall be elected for 4-year  terms, half~ 
to begin every 2 years. 

, 

(2) The Assembly shall be comprised of representatives from  neighborhood districts, as 

provided in section 6. Assembly members shall be has a membership of 80 members elected fot 
2-year terms; 

( (3) The terms of a Senator or a Member of the Assembly shall commence on the first Monday 

in December next following her or his election. 

(4) During her or his lifetime a person may serve no more than 12 years in.the Senate, the 

Assembly, or both, in any combination of terms. This subdivision shall apply only to those 
Members of the Senate or the Assembly who are first elected to the Legislature after the effective 
date of this subdivision and who have not previously served in the Senate or Assembly. Members 
of the Senate or Assembly who were elected before the effective date of this subdivision may 
· 
serve only the number of terms allowed at the time of the last election before the effective date of 
this subdivision. 
(b)Election of members of the Assembly shall be on the firstTuesday after the first Monday in 
November of even-numbered years unless otherwise prescribed by the Legislature. Senators shall 
be elected at the same time and places as members of the Assembly. 
(c) A person is ineligible to be a member of the Legislature unless the person is an elector and 
has been is  a resident of the legislative neighborhood district for one year, and a citizen of the 
United States and a resident of California for  3 years, immediately preceding the election, and 
service of the full term of office to which the person is seeking to be elected would not exceed 
the maximum years of service perniitted by subdivision (a) of this section. 
(d)·When a vacancy occurs in the Legislature the Governor  immediately shall call an election to 
fill the vacancy. 
(e)  The Senate Working Committee.shall be comprised of 40 Senate members, chosen from 
among the neighborhood representatives elected within each Senatorial District. The Assembly 
Working Committee shall be comprised of 80 Assembly members chosen from  among the 
neighborhood representatives elected within each Assembly District. One Member of the 
Working Committee shall be elected by majority vote of the neighborhood representatives from 
each Senatorial and Assembly District in an open meeting held pursuant to section 3(a).  When a 
vacancy occurs in a Worldng Committee, the vacancy shall be filled by the neighborhood 
representatives from  a Senatorial or Assembly District, as appropriate.  The neighborhood 
representatives may remove their respective Working Committee member upon a rollcall vote 
entered into the journal, two thirds of the neighborhood representatives concurring. 

Sec. 3.  (a) The neighborhood representatives from each Assembly and Senate District 
Legislature shall convene in each respective District in regular session at noon on the fitst 
Monday in December of each even-numbered  year for the purpose of choosing which 
neighborhood representative will Serve in the Working Cbmmittees of and each house.  On the 
second Monday in December of each even-numbered  year, the regular session of the Legislature 
shall commence and each Working Committee shall convene and shall immediately organize. 

2 

Each session of the Legislature shall adjourn sine die by operation ofthe Constitution at 
midnight on November 30 of the following even-numbered year. 
(b) On extraordinary occasions the  Governor by proclamation may cause the Legislature  or both 
Working Committees to assemble in special session. When so assembled it has power to legislate 
only on  subjects specified in the proclamation but may provide for expenses and other matters 
incidentalto the session. 
(c) The neighborhood representatives in each district may convene upon petition signed by 
twenty-five percent (25%) ofthe members for the purpose ofremoving a member oftheir 
respective Working Committee pursuant to section 2(e), or to provide direction or input to their 
respective Working Committee regarding any legislative matter. 
(d) Except as provided in section 9.5;  all legislative power provided for  in this Article shall be 
exercised by the Senate and Assembly Working Committees and any reference to "Senate," 
"Assembly," "Legislature," or "house," herein means the Senate and Assembly Working 
Committees. 
(e)  The provisions of section 4(a), 4.5,  5,  13  and  15, including the provisions regarding ethics, 
and conflicts of interest, shall apply to  all members of the Legislature, including the Senate and. 
Assembly Working Committees. 
(f)  Notwithstanding section 8 ofArticle III: 

(1) The annual compensation for each Senate and Assembly neighborhood representative shall 

be one dollar ($1.00). 

(2) The annual compensation for a member of the Senate and Assembly Working Committees 
shall be equivalent to one hundred and twenty percent (120%) ofthe annual median household 
income for the State of California, based on the most recent United States Census Bureau 
American Community Survey published at the time a new regular session is convened, as 
described in subdivision (a) of this section. 

(3)  Notwithstanding section 4(b), neighborhood representatives shall be reimbursed for his or 

her actual travel expenses attending local meetings ofthe neighborhood representatives and 
members ofthe Senate and Assembly Working Committee shall be reimbursed for his or her 
actual travel and living expenses, not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200) per day.  The 
Citizens Compensation Commission may adjust the per diem of members based on the 
Consumer Price Index for California. 

Sec. 6.  For the purpose of choosing members ofthe Legislature, the State shall be divided into 
40 Senatorial and 80 Assembly districts to be called Senatorial and Assembly Districts. Each 
Senatorial district shall be further divided into neighborhood districts of populations of 
approximately 10,000 persons, as nearly equal as is practical.  choose one Senator and each Each 
Assembly district shall be further divided into neighborhood districts of populations of 
approximately 5,000 persons, as nearly equal as is practical.  choose one member of the 
Assembly. 
Boundary lines for Senatorial, Assembly, and neighborhood districts shall be drawn pursuant to 
Article XXI. 

Sec. 7.5.  In the fiscal year immediately following the adoption of The Low Cost New 
Hampshire-Style Neighborhood Legislature Act this Act, the total aggregate expenditures of the 
Legislature for the compensation of members and employees of,  and the operating expenses and 
equipment for, the Legislature may.not exceed an amount equal to nine hundred fifty thousand 

3 

dollars ($950,000) per member for that fiscal year or 80 sixty seven (67%) percent of the amount 
of money expended for those purposes in the preceding completed fiscal year immediately 
. 
preceding the effective date of this Act, whichever is  less ..  For each fiscal year thereafter, the total 
aggregate expenditures may not exceed an amount equal to that expended for those purposes in 
the preceding fiscal  year, adjusted and compounded by an amount equal to the percentage 
increase in the appropriations limit for the state established pursuant to Article XII  B. 

Sec. 9.5.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, except for urgency bills 
pursuant to  section 8(d), a bill, including the budget bill, passed by both the Senate and 
Assembly Working Committees shall  not be presented to the Governor unless the bill has first 
been presented to and approved by each house of the whole Legislature by the appropriate vote• 
required for enactment of the bill.  The Working Committees shall notify the members of the 
whole Legislature of bills awaiting their action and provide not less than 10 days for members to 
cast their votes. Members of the whole Legislature shall vote electronically online from their 
home districts and all votes shall be viewable by the public; No amendment to  a bill so presented 
may be offered, considered, or approved by either house of the whole Legislature. 

SECTION 4.  EFFECTIVEDATE 

This Act shall go into effect immediately upon its adoption by the voters and shall become 
operative as  follows: 

. 

. 

. 

A.  The Citizens Redistricting Commission shall draw boundary lines for neighborhood districts 
based on the State Senatorial and Assembly Districts boundaries approved in 2021  pursuant to 
· 
Article XXI. 
B.  Elections shall be conducted and the Legislature convened pursuant to this Act in 2022.  Any 
Senator serving an unexpired term in 2022 shall be deemed the neighborhood representative for 
the neighborhood district in·which he or she resides without an election, and shall be exempt 
from any reduction in compensation pursuant to section 3(f) for the remainder of theunexpired· 
term.  Iftwo or more Senators reside in the.same neighborhood district, the Citizens 
Redistricting Commission shall assign each Senator to represent a neighborhood district nearest 
to his or her residence for the remainder of the term, without an election. 
C. The compensation and expense reimbursement  limitations shall become effective for persons 
elected commencing in 2022, except as provided in paragraph B.  The budget limitation for the 
Legislature shall commence with the Legislative session commenced in December of 2022. 

SECTION 5.  SEVERABILITY/CONFLICTING MEASURES/STANDING 

If any part of this measure or the application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the 
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications which can reasonably be given effect. : 
without the invalid provision or application . 

. This measure is intended to be comprehensive.  It is the intent of the People that in the event 
this measure or measures relating to  the same subject shall appear on the same statewide election 

4 

ballot, the provisions of the other rrieasure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this 
measure.  In the event that this measure receives a greater number of affirmative votes, the 
provisions of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and all provisions of the other measure 
or measures shall be null and void. 

The people of the State of California declare that the proponent of this Act has a direct and 
personal stake in defending this Act and grant formal authority to the proponent to  defend this 
Act in any legal proceeding, either by intervening in such legal proceeding, or by defending the 
Act on behalf of the people and the State in the event that the State declines to defend the Act or 
declines to appeal an adverse judgment against the Act. 

In the event that the proponent is defending this Act in a legal proceeding because the State 
has declined to defend it or to appeal an ad.verse judgment against it, the proponent shall   act as: 
an agent of the people and the State; be subject to all ethical, legal, and fiduciary duties 
applicable to such parties in such legal proceedings; take and be subject to the Oath of Office 
prescribed by Article XX, section 3 of the California Constitution for the limited purpose of 
acting on behalf of the people and the State in such legal proceeding; and be entitled to recover 
reasonable legal fees and related costs from the State. 

5 

