Law  Offices  of 
OLSON 

HAGEL& 

FISHBURN 

LLP 

Lance H. Olson 

Richard C. Miadich 

Richard R.  Rios 

Lacey E.  Keys 

Bruce J. Hagel 
of counsel 

Diane M. Fishburn 
of counsel 

Deborah B. Caplan 
of counsel 

Christopher W,  Waddell 

Betty Ann Downing 

Emily A.  Andrews 

Erika M. Boyd 

Adam E.  Silver 

Northern California 
555 Capitol Mall 
Suite 1425 
Sacramento, CA 
95814-4602 

Tel:  (916)  442-2952 
Fax:  (916) 442-1280 

Southern California 
3605 Long Beach Blvd 
Suite 426 
Long Beach. CA 
90807-6010 

Tel:  (562) 427-2100 
Fax:  (562) 427-2237 

17-0007 

Arndt#  1 

RECEIVED 

AUG  O 7 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL' S OFFICE 

August 7, 2017 

VIA HAND DELIVERY 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

RE: 

Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure - The 
Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, Natural 
Resources Protection and Park Improvement Act of 2018 
(No. 17-0007) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On behalf of Joseph Caves, the proponent of The Safe Drinking Water, 

Water Quality and Supply, Natural Resources Protection and Park 
Improvement Act of 2018, please find enclosed the following documents: 

•  The amended text of "The Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality 

and Supply, Natural Resources Protection and Park Improvement 
Act of2018"; 

•  A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended text; 
•  The signed authorization from the proponent for the submission of 

the amended text together with his request that the Attorney 
General's Office prepare a circulating title and summary using the 
amended text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this 

proposed initiative to Lance H. Olson at Olson, Hagel & Fishburn LLP, 555 
Capitol Mall, Suite 1425, Sacramento, CA 95814, (916) 442-2952, 
lance@olsonhagel.com. 

Very truly yours, 

OLSON HAGEL & FISHBURN LLP 

~E~~ 

LEK/emb 

J:\POL\29068\2017-2018 Water Bond Campaign\Proposed Amendments\Amendment Cover Letter 8.3. 17.docx 

www.olsonhagel.com ~

 

1 7- 000 7 

Arndt. #  1

VIA HAND DELIVERY 

August 7, 2017 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: Submission of Amendment to The Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, Natural 
Resources Protection and Park Improvement Act of 2018 (No.  17-0007) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On July 3, 2017 the proponent of a proposed statewide initiative titled "The Safe Drinking 
Water, Water Quality and Supply, Natural Resources Protection and Park Improvement Act of 
2018" ("Initiative") submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and 
summary pursuant to section 10( d) of Article II of the California Constitution.  Pursuant to 
Elections Code section 9002(b ), the proponent hereby submits timely amendments to the text of 
the Initiative.  As the proponent of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the amended text to 
the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably germane to the theme, purpose, and 
subject of the Initiative. I request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and 
summary using the amended  Initiative. 

1 7-00 0 7 

Arndt. # 

/ 

8-7-17 Amendments 

The Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, Natural Resources Protection 

and Park Improvement Act of 2018 

SECTION  1.  Division 45 (commencing with Section 75300) is added to the Public Resources Code, to read: 

DIVISION 45. 

CHAPTER l. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS 

75300. This division shall be known, and may be cited as, the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and 

Supply, Natural Resources Protection and Park Improvement Act of 2018 

75301.  The people of California find  and declare that the state's natural resources are threatened by a 

changing climate, intense and prolonged droughts, and pressures from  a growing population, as well as  a 

reduction in federal protections for land and water resources.  The impacts of these threats include: 

(a) Hundreds of thousands of Californians do not have access to safe and dependable drinking water 

supplies. 

(b) California's changing climate has put our water supplies in jeopardy. 

(c) Many of California' s rivers,  lakes and streams fail to meet Clean Water Act standards. 

( d) Pollution from urban runoff and toxic chemicals threatens our beaches, bays and coastal waters. 

75032. The people of California further find and declare all of the following: 

(a) Protecting, restoring, and increasing public access to  California's natural resources provides 

tremendous benefits to Californians: 

( 1) Forest lands and other natural areas are integral to providing Californians with clean, safe and reliable 

drinking water for our families,  water supplies that support our fanners and other industries, and water that our 

fish and wildlife resources depend on to survive. 

(2) Rivers, wetlands, parks, and other open space lands help keep our waters clean and help promote the 

recharge of our groundwater resources that provide most of our water supplies during droughts. 

(3) Urban, suburban, and rural parks work together with our natural resources to help capture, store, and 

cleanse runoff and stormwater, thereby reducing flooding; preventing pollution of our rivers, bays, and beaches; 

and protecting our drinking water sources. 

(4) As our population grows, we need to invest in protecting and increasing our groundwater supplies, 

using our water supplies more efficiently, and protecting, restoring, and enhancing the natural resources that are 

the source of our water supplies. 

(5) Protecting and restoring our natural systems and establishing additional parks and open space areas in 

our communities provides cost-effective approaches to protect and enhance California's water supplies. 

1 

(6) California's natural resources, open space areas, and parks work together in an integrated way to 

protect and enhance California's water resources and provide significant additional  benefits to California's 

residents and visitors including, but not limited to: 

(A) Cleaner air by protecting and increasing the number trees, including redwoods, and other plants that 

filter out air pollutants and contribute the oxygen that we depend on for survival. 

(B) Reduce the emission of greenhouse gasses that scientists have detennined intensify and increase the 

frequency of droughts that threaten the availability of water, threaten public health by increasing the frequency 

and severity of excessively hot days that disproportionately hann our children and seniors, and damage our 

natural resources by causing more severe fires and other problems. Protecting, restoring, and enhancing our 

natural resources and parks is one of the most effective ways we can increase the storage of carbon to help reduce 

damage caused by climate change. 

(C) Providing greater access for residents and visitors to  visit our natural resources and parks can foster 

greater education and awareness of the importance of these resources to our water supplies, while increasing 

contributions to California's eighty-seven-billion-dollar ($87,000,000,000) outdoor recreation economy that 

provides more than 700,000 jobs and billions of dollars in local and state revenues. 

(D) Providing natural areas and parks in and near our communities where Californians can exercise can 

reduce inactivity and obesity that costs California over forty billion dollars ($40,000,000,000) annually in health 

care costs and lost productivity due to obesity-related illnesses. 

(7) Protecting and restoring California' s fish and wild life habitat, including habitat for threatened and 

endangered species, will further protect access to  water supplies by reducing conflicts between water diversions 

and survival of California' s fish and wildlife. 

(b) Periodic investments are needed to protect, restore, and enhance our natural resources and parks to 

ensure all Californians have safe, clean and reliable drinking water, prevent pollution and disruption of our water 

supplies, correct problems that currently exist, prepare for future droughts, and protect our natural resources for 

the benefit and enjoyment of our children and future generations. 

75033. It is the intent of the people that investment of public funds pursuant to this division will result in 

significant public benefits . 

CHAPTER 2. SAFE DRINKING WATER, WATER QUALITY AND SUPPLY, NATURAL RESOURCES 

PROTECTION AND PARK IMPROVEMENT FUND OF 2018 

75305.  The proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to this division shall be deposited in the Safe 

Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, Natural Resources Protection and Park Improvement Fund of 2018, 

which is hereby created. Except as specifically provided in this division the money shall be available for 

2 

appropriation by the Legislature, in the manner and for the purposes set forth in this division in accordance with 

the following schedule: 

(a) The sum of three billion nine hundred ninety million dollars ($3,990,000,000) for safe drinking water 

and water quality projects in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3. 

(b) The sum of two billion two hundred million dollars ($2,200,000,000) for projects to improve the 

climate resilience of natural systems in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4. 

(c) The sum of one billion eight hundred million dollars ($1,800,000,000) for state and local park 

improvements in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5. 

CHAPTER 3. SAFE DRINKING WATER AND WATER QUALITY PROJECTS 

75310. The sum of seven hundred million dollars ($700,000,000) shall be available to the  state board for 

expenditures, grants, and loans to improve water quality or help provide clean, safe,  and reliable drinking water to 

all Californians. 

75320.The projects eligible for funding pursuant to this chapter shall  help improve water quality for a 

beneficial use. The purposes of this chapter are to: 

(a) Reduce contaminants in drinking water supplies  regardless of the source of the water or the 

contamination. 

(b) Assess and prioritize the risk of contamination to drinking water supplies. 

(c) Address the critical and immediate needs of disadvantaged, rural, or small communities  that suffer 

from contaminated drinking water supplies, including, but not limited to, projects that address a public health 

emergency. 

(d) Leverage other private, federal, state, and local drinking water quality and wastewater treatment funds. 

( e) Reduce contaminants  in  discharges to, and improve the quality of, waters of the state. 

(f) Prevent further contamination of drinking water supplies. 

(g) Provide disadvantaged communities with public drinking water infrastructure that provides  clean, safe, 

and reliable drinking water supplies that the community can sustain over the long tenn. 

(h) Ensure access to clean, safe, reliable, and  afford able drinking water for California' s communities. 

(i) Meet primary and secondary safe drinking water standards or remove contaminants identified by the 

state or federal government for development of a primary or secondary drinking water standard. 

75330. The contaminants that may be addressed with funding pursuant to this chapter may include, but 

shall not be limited to, lead, nitrates, perchlorate, MTBE (methyl tertiary butyl ether), arsenic, selenium, 

hexavalent chromium, mercury,  PCE (perchloroethylene), TCE (trichloroethylene), DCE (dichloroethene), DCA 

3 

( dichloroethane ),  1,2,3-TCP ( trichloropropane) , carbon tetrachloride,  1,4-dioxane,  1,4-dioxacyclohexane, 

nitrosodimethylamine, bromide, iron, manganese, total dissolved solids, electrical conductivity, and uranium. 

75340. Of the funds authorized by Section 75310, two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be 

available for deposit in the State Water Pollution Control Revolving Fund Small Community Grant Fund created 

pursuant to Section 13477.6 of the Water Code for grants and loans for wastewater treatment projects.  Priority 

shall be given to  projects that serve disadvantaged communities and severely disadvantaged communities, and to 

projects that address public health hazards.  Projects may include, but not be limited to, projects that identify, plan, 

design, and implement regional mechanisms to consolidate wastewater systems or provide affordable treatment 

technologies. 

75350. (a)  Of the funds  authorized by Section 75310, fi ve hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) shall 

be available for grants and  loans for public  water system infrastructure improvements and related actions  to meet 

safe drinking water standards,  ensure affordable drinking water, or both.  Priority shall  be given to projects that 

provide treatment for contamination or access to an alternate drinking water source or sources for small 

comm unity water systems or state small water systems  in  disadvantaged communities whose 

drinking water source is impaired by chemical and nitrate contaminants and other heal th  hazards  identified by the 

state board.  Eligible recipients serve disadvantaged communities  and are public water systems, publi c agencies 

and nonprofit organizations that serve disadvantaged communities. Priority shall  be given to  projects that provide 

shared solutions  for multiple communi ties, at least one of which  is a disadvantaged community that lacks sa fe, 

affordable drinking water and is served by a small community water system, state small water system, or a  private 

well. Construction grants shall  be limi ted to eight million dol lars  ($8 ,000,000) per project, except that the state 

board  may set a limit of not more than twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) for  projects that provide regional 

benefits  or are shared among multiple entities, including consolidation of two or more drinking wa ter systems,  at 

least one of which shall be a sma ll  disadvantaged community. Not more than 25  percent ofa grant may be 

awarded  in advance of actual  expenditures. The state board may adopt additional requirements for the recipient of 

the grant regarding the use of the advanced payments to  ensure that the moneys are used properly. 

(b) Of the funds  authori zed  by this section, up to ten million dollars ($10,000,000) shall be available for 

grants  to  provide school children with safe drinking water under the Drinking Water for Schools  Grant Program 

pursuant to  Section  116276 of the Health Safety Code. 

75355. The state board may allocate funds for initial operation and maintenance costs for a project that 

serves a disadvantaged community pursuant to Sections 75340 and 75350. For this purposes of this section, 

"initial  operation and maintenance costs" means those initial, eligible, and reimbursable costs under a 

construction funding agreement that are incurred up to, and including, initial startup testing of the constructed 

project in order to deem the project complete. Initial operation and maintenance costs are eligible to receive 

funding pursuant to this section for a period not to  exceed three years. 

4 

75360. For the purposes of awarding funding under Section 75340 and 75350: 

(a) A local cost share of not less than 50 percent of the total costs of the project shall be required. The 

cost-sharing requirement may be waived or reduced for projects that directly benefit a disadvantaged community. 

(b) At least  10 percent of the funds shall be allocated for projects serving severely disadvantaged 

comm uni ties. 

(c) Up to  15 percent of the funds may be allocated for technical assistance to disadvantaged communities. 

The state board shall operate a multidisciplinary technical assistance program for small and disadvantaged 

communities  which may include, but is not limited to, outreach, education, needs assessment, review of 

alternative approaches to provide communities with safe drinking water or wastewater services, project selection 

and design, board and operator training and other technical, managerial, and financial capacity building assistance 

for utilities serving disadvantaged communities related to providing communities with safe drinking water or 

wastewater services. 

( d) Funding for technical assistance to benefit disadvantaged communities may exceed 15 percent of the 

funds  allocated, subject to the detennination of the need for additional planning funding by the state board. 

(e) For the public purposes of ensuring California's economically disadvantaged  residents have adequate 

access to  clean drinking water and adequate sanitation to protect public health, funds may be used for grants and 

loans to:  (i)  replace failed drinking  water wells, including private wells;  (ii) make emergency drinking water 

repairs,  including replacement of failed components, to community water systems that lack the funds to make 

immediate repairs or for replacement of failed system components;  and (iii)  to help connect homes to public water 

systems or wastewater treatment systems.  Connecting homes to public water and wastewater systems may include 

connection fees  charged by water and wastewater systems, onsite connection of homes,  and abandonment of 

septic or other domestic waste disposal infrastructure. The state board shall establish incqme and affordability 

criteria before granting or loaning any funds pursuant to this subdivision. 

75370. For the purpose of providing the state share needed to  leverage federal funds to assist communities 

in providing safe drinking water, any funds appropriated for the purposes of Section 75350 shall be available for 

deposit in the Safe Drinking Water State Revolving Fund, created by Section 11 6760.30 of the Health and Safety 

Code, prior to expenditure. 

75380. The sum of six  hundred million dollars ($600,000,000) shall be available to the state board for 

grants for multibenefit stonnwater management proj ects. 

(a)  Eligible projects may include, but shall not be limited to projects that: 

( l ) Capture rainwater, stonnwater, or dry-weather runoff. 

(2) Augment local water supplies through groundwater infiltration or capture, or on-site capture and use. 

(3) Improve water quality in rivers, streams,  lakes, and bays . 

( 4) Prevent or reduce stonnwater pollution of oceans and beaches. 

5 

(5) Provide community enhancements such as the greening of schools, walkways, parks and wetlands, 

and maintenance of the urban forest, or increased public access to rivers, lakes, and streams. 

(6) Implement a stonnwater resource plan developed in accordance with Part 2.3 (commencing with 

Section  10560) of Division 6 of the Water Code. 

(7) Utilize natural infrastructure such as  wetlands, river floodplains, or other projects on natural and 

working lands. 

(8) Develop decision support tools and co-investment models that facilitate cost-sharing and co-funding 

of projects by detennining the benefits and costs of various elements of multi-benefit stonnwater projects. 

(b) The following shall be given additional consideration in project selection: 

(1) Projects that provide regional benefits. 

(2) Projects that provide a local cost share or leverage local, federal or private funding. 

(3) Projects that increase public access to parks, wetlands, rivers, lakes and streams, especially in 

disadvantaged communities. 

( 4) Projects that demonstrate coordination among government agencies involved in stonnwater projects 

and programs. 

(5) Stakeholder participation in project planning and implementation from communities adjacent to the 

affected waterways. 

(6) Partnerships between agencies, community groups, nongovernmental organizations, and other entities. 

(c) Of the amount made available pursuant to  Section 75380, at least fo1ty million dollars ($40,000,000) 

shall be available for projects that reduce the flow of trash and other pollutants: ( 1) into a National Estuarine 

Reserve, onto beaches, or into near-shore coastal waters in San Diego County, or (2) into San Diego Bay. Priority 

shall be given to  projects that reduce the flow of trash or other pollutants into one or more units of the State Park 

System. 

(d) At  least 50 percent of the funds available pursuant to  Section 75380 shall be allocated for projects that 

serve and directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

75390. The sum of three hundred million ($300,000,000) shall be allocated to  the Department of 

Water Resources for expenditures, grants, and loans to support sustainable groundwater management. 

Funds shall be allocated as follows: 

(a) The sum of two hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000) shall be appropriated for projects 

and programs that support sustainable groundwater management consistent with Part 2.74 (commencing 

with Section 10720) of Division 6 of the Water Code. The funds shall be used for grants that advance 

sustainable groundwater management through implementation of groundwater sustainability plans and 

projects. Eligible applicants must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Sections  10723.2 and 

10727.8 of the Water Code.  Eligible projects include: 

6 

(I) Groundwater recharge and storage projects including but not limited to groundwater recharge, 

storage and conveyance facilities; planning of facilities such as feasibility studies and environmental 

compliance; distribution systems, and monitoring facilities.  No grant made pursuant to this section shall 

exceed ten million dollars ($10,000,000). 

(2) Projects that develop or implement groundwater sustainability plans pursuant to Part 2.74 

(commencing with Section 10720) of Division 6 of the Water Code. Projects eligible for funding include 

but are not limited to feasibility studies, environmental compliance, engineering work used to develop 

groundwater use and sustainable yield for specific projects, and innovative decision support tools. 

(3) Projects that address one or more undesirable results identified in an  adopted Groundwater 

Sustainability Plan that directly benefit one or more disadvantaged communities. 

(4) Other activities undertaken in accordance with an approved groundwater sustainability plan 

adopted under the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act, including sustainable management 

planning, measurement and monitoring, market development and administration, demand and supply side 

management incentives for pumpers, land use,  land management, groundwater recharge and banking 

facilities, floodwater capture, on-fann recharge, conveyance improvements, land retirement, habitat 

creation, mitigation of interconnected surface water depletions, and community outreach. 

(b) Of the funds allocated in subdivision (a), the Department of Water Resources may allocate up 

to  ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for the development of publicly accessible decision support tools to 

assist Groundwater Sustainability Agencies in conducting drinking water quality analysis, including the 

development and assessment of sustainable yield, undesirable results, measurable objectives and other 

required targets. The decision support tools should also support vulnerability assessments to help 

determine communities that may be at risk of facing water supply or contamination challenges.  The tools 

shall be designed to be available for other efforts such as drought vulnerability assessments and shall be 

linked to the state board 's Human Right to Water indicator. 

(c) Of the funds allocated in subdivision (a) the Department of Water Resources shall set aside 

ten million dollars ($10,000,000) to support Groundwater Sustainability Agencies with activities in 

support of establishing a local funding mechanism to finance the implementation of a Groundwater 

Sustainability Plan pursuant to Water Code section 10730, including supporting studies and analysis and 

public hearings. 

( d)  Of the funds allocated in subdivision (a) the Department of Water Resources shall set aside 

twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) to enable local Groundwater Sustainability Agencies to purchase 

meters for wells within their jurisdiction or invest in other methods for measurement of water use. 

(e) Of the funds allocated in subdivision (a) the sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall 

be available to the Department of Water Resources for expenditures, grants, or loans to facilitate 

7 

sustainable groundwater management through the collection and dissemination of data and information 

that supp01t the development of water budgets and evaluation of undesirable results pursuant to 

subdivisions (x) and (y) of Section 10721  of the Water Code 

( f) For the purposes of awarding funding under  this section, a local cost share of not less than 50 

percent of the total costs of the project shall be required. The cost-sharing requirement may be waived or 

reduced for proj ects that directly benefit a disadvantaged community or for those projects that can 

demonstrate that they will contribute to sustainability faster than the 20 years required under paragraph 

( 1) of subdivision (b) of section 10727 .2 of the Water Code. 

(g) At least twenty-five percent of the funds  available pursuant to this section shall be allocated 

for projects that serve and directly benefit disadvantaged communities, including at least ten percent of 

the funds serving severely disadvantaged communities. 

(h) At least  10 percent of the funds avai lable pursuant to this section shall be allocated for 

projects in basins not currently in a condition of critical overdraft, with special consideration for projects 

in basins where groundwater and surface waters are interconnected. 

(i) Of the funds allocated in subdivision (a), at least twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall be 

available to the state board for planning and for technical assistance to disadvantaged communities. The 

state board shall operate a multidisciplinary technical assistance program for small and disadvantaged 

communities, and supp01t the involvement of disadvantaged communities and the public in  groundwater 

sustainability agencies and in  the development and implementation of groundwater sustainability plans. 

The funds shall be distributed by the Office of Sustainable Water Solutions at the state board, in 

consultation with the Department of Water Resources. 

(j) The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be used for grants to retire, fallow, create 

habitat or create recharge basins on irrigated lands for the purpose of reducing groundwater consumption 

in groundwater basin subject to  the requirements of the Sustainable Groundwater Management 

Act.  Grants shall be for projects with willing landowners and may include fee title acquisition, 

conservation easements, agreements for rotational fallowing, or agreements to fallow lands in certain 

water year types. Projects must include habitat restoration. 

75400. The sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be available for the protection, 

restoration, and improvement of upper watershed lands, including forest  lands, meadows, wetlands, chaparral, and 

riparian habitat including lands owned by the United States, in order to protect and improve water supply and 

water quality, improve forest health, reduce wildfire danger, mitigate the effects of wildfires on water quality and 

supply, increase flood protection, or to protect or restore riparian or aquatic resources.  Eligible projects may 

include research and monitoring to measure the impact of forest restoration work on climate and other benefits, 

including long-tenn air quality,  water quality and quantity, greenhouse gas emissions, carbon storage, habitat, 

8 

recreational uses, and community vitality.  Projects shall be based on the best available science regarding forest 

restoration and must be undertaken to protect and restore ecological values and to promote forest conditions that 

are more resilient to  wildfire, climate change, and other disturbances. Funds shall be allocated as  follows: 

(a) The sum ofone hundred fifty million ($150,000,000) shall be available for the Sierra Nevada 

Conservancy for the protection and restoration of Sierra Nevada watersheds, including projects consistent with the 

objectives of the Sierra Nevada Watershed Improvement Program. 

(b) The sum of fifty million ($50,000,000) shall be available for the California Tahoe Conservancy for the 

protection and restoration of watersheds in the Tahoe Basin. 

75410. The sum of two hundred forty million dollars ($240,000,000) shall be available to the Natural 

Resources Agency for the Salton Sea restoration activities identified in the Natural Resources Agency report 

entitled, "Salton  Sea Management Program  Phase  I :  10  Year Plan," dated March 2017, the final management plan 

report, and any subsequent revisions to this plan. 

(a) Of this amount, not less than ten million dollars ($ 10,000,000) shall be available for purposes 

consistent with  the New River Water Quality, Public Health, and River Parkway Development Program, as 

described in  Section 71103.6. 

(b) Of this amount,  not less than fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be administered as grants by the 

Wildlife Conservation Board to  local agencies and non-profit organizations  for restoration activities identified in 

the Salton Sea Management Program Phase  1:  l O Year Plan, dated March 2017, the final management plan report, 

and any subsequent revisions to this plan. 

(c) In  allocating funds pursuant to this section, the Natural Resources Agency shall give priority to the 

development and construction of infrastructure to collect, store, and convey water to supply Salton Sea air quality 

and habitat projects as  identified in the Salton Sea Management Program Phase  1:  10  Year Plan. The Natural 

Resources Agency shall report to the legislative water policy committees and budget committees on progress in 

completing this infrastructure by December  1st of each even numbered year. 

(d) At least fifty percent of the funds available pursuant to this section shall be allocated for projects that 

directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

75420. The sum of two hundred seventy million dollars ($270,000,000) shall be available, for projects for 

restoration, protection and preservation of the Los Angeles River and its tributaries, as follows: 

(a) One hundred thirty five million dollars ($135,000,000) pursuant to Division 22.8 (commencing with 

Section 32600) of the Public Resources Code, and Section 79508 of the Water Code. 

(b) One hundred thirty five million dollars ($135,000,000) pursuant to  Division 23  (commencing with 

Section 33000) of the Public Resources Code, and Section 79508 of the Water Code. 

(c) Of the total amount of funds available pursuant to this  section at least forty percent (40%) of the 

funds  shall be allocated for projects serving and directly benefitting disadvantaged communities. 

9 

(d) Projects funded by this section may include, but are not limited to, projects to capture stonnwater, 

acquire or develop urban park and recreational areas and facilities, restore habitat, or a combination thereof. No 

less than ten percent ( 10%) of the total funds  available shall be used for community access projects to promote 

public access to  and participation in the conservation of land, water, and wildlife resources. 

75430. (a) The sum of three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) shall be available to the  state board 

for grants or loans for water recycling and advanced treatment technology projects, including all of the following: 

(1)  Water recycling projects, including, but not limited to, treatment, storage, conveyance, and 

distribution facilities for potable and nonpotable recycling projects. 

(2)  Contaminant and salt removal projects, including, groundwater desalination and associated treatment, 

storage, conveyance, and distribution facilities. 

(3)  Dedicated distribution infrastructure to  serve residential, commercial, agricultural, and industrial end-

user retrofit projects to allow use of recycled water. 

(4)  Pilot projects for new potable reuse and other salt and contaminant removal technology. 

(5)  Multibenefit recycled water projects that improve water quality. 

(6)  Technical assistance and grant writing assistance for disadvantaged communities. 

(b) At least a twenty-five percent (25%) local cost share shall be required for projects funded pursuant to 

this section. That cost share may be suspended or reduced for disadvantaged communities. 

(c) The following criteria shall be considered in the selection of projects to receive funding pursuant to 

this section: 

( 1)  Water supply reliability improvement. 

(2)  Water quality and ecosystem benefits related to decreased reliance on diversions from the Delta or 

instream flows. 

(3)  Public health benefits from  improved drinking water quality or supply. 

(4)  Cost-effectiveness. 

(5)  Energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emission impacts. 

(f6  Reasonable geographic allocation to  eligible projects throughout the state, including both northern 

and southern California and coastal and inland regions. 

75460. (a) The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) shall be available to the Department of Water 

Resources and the state board for expenditures, grants or loans to improve water management by enhancing the 

quality and availability of water data.  Funds shall be allocated for the following purposes: 

(1) Purchase, installation and maintenance of water measuring equipment to monitor instream flow and 

water diversions, 

10 

(2) Development or acquisition of infonnation systems, equipment, or technologies that improve the 

state's ability to forecast water supply, manage water resources and manage water use, including, but not limited 

to, reducing adverse impact of droughts. 

(3) Development or acquisition of infonnation systems, equipment, or technologies, including methods or 

platforms that utilize remote sensing technology-to  measure evapotranspiration, habitat quality, habitat extent, 

floodplain characteristics, groundwater basins or depths, or land subsidence. 

( 4) Monitoring the efficacy of stream flow enhancement projects. 

(5) Implementation of Chapter 506, Statutes of 2016. 

(6) Digitizing and making available data and record of water rights, water diversion, water use  and well 

data. 

(b) The Department of Water Resources and state board shall consult with each other in developing 

guidelines and setting ptiorities for the expenditure of these funds. 

75470. The sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be available to  the Wildlife 

Conservation Board to improve conditions for fish and wi ldlife  in streams, rivers, wildlife refuges, wetland 

habitat areas and estuaries. Eligible projects include acquisition of water or water tights  from willing sellers, 

acquisition of land that includes water rights or contractual tight to water, short or long-tenn water transfers or 

leases, projects that provide water for fish and wildlife, or projects that improve aquatic or riparian habitat 

conditions. 

75480. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available to the Wildlife Conservation 

Board for coastal, Klamath, and Central Valley salmon and steelhead fishe1ies restoration projects. The Wildlife 

Conservation Board shall give priority to projects that contribute to the recovery of salmon and steelhead species 

listed pursuant to the state or federal endangered species acts. 

75485 . (a) The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall be available to  the Wildlife 

Conservation Board for projects to protect migratory birds consistent with the Central Valley Joint Venture 

Implementation Plan, as that plan may be amended, through habitat acquisition, easements, restoration:  to provide 

water for wildlife refuges and wildlife habitat areas and including projects pursuant to  the California Waterfowl 

Habitat Program pursuant to Article 7 ( commencing with Section 3460) of Chapter 2 of Part  I of Division 4 of the 

Fish and Game Code; and for projects to educate the public about the benefits of migratory bird habitat including, 

but not limited to, water supply and water quality benefits. 

(b) Of the amount appropriated by this section, ten million dollars ($10,000,000) shall be deposited in the 

Shared Habitat Alliance for Recreational Enhancement (SHARE) Account established pursuant to Section 1572 

of the Fish and Game Code and administered by the Department of Fish and Wildlife for the purposes of 

providing hunting and other wildlife-dependent recreational opportunities to the public through voluntary 

agreements with private landowners. 

11 

75490. The sum of five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) shall be available to  the Department of 

Water Resources and the Central Valley Flood Protection Board for multibenefit flood management projects that 

achieve public safety and provide improvements to wildlife habitat. Eligible project types shall include but not be 

limited to  levee setbacks, creation or enhancement of floodplains and bypasses, connecting rivers with floodplains, 

building and expanding culverts and bridges, groundwater recharge projects in floodplains, and land acquisitions 

and easements necessary for these projects. 

(a) Of the amount appropriated by this section, one hundred million ($100,000,000) shall be made 

available for flood system repairs to protect public health and safety. 

(b) Of the amount appropriated by this section, fifty million ($50,000,000) shall  be made available for 

flood management projects in coastal watersheds. Priority shall be given to multibenefit flood management 

projects that reduce the impacts of climate change on coastal infrastructure, communities, and ecosystems. 

(c) Of the amount appropriated by this section,  two million ($2,000,000) shall be made available to the 

Department of Fish and Wild Ii fe to expedite the repair, maintenance and improvement of flood control 

infrastructure through the development and adoption of investment strategies and mitigation credit agreements 

pursuant to Chapter 9 ( commencing with Section  1850) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code. Mitigation 

credit agreements shall  be consistent with the Central Valley Flood Protection Plan. 

( d) Grants for projects within the State Plan of Flood Control shall be consistent with the Central Valley 

Flood Protection  Plan 's Conservation Strategy. 

(e) At  least twenty-five percent of the funds  available pursuant to this section shall be allocated for 

projects  that directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

75500. The sum of one hundred million dollars ($ 100,000,000) shall be available to  the Department of 

Water Resources for water conservation and water-use efficiency plans, projects, and programs. 

(a) Eligible projects may not result in a significant reduction of instream flows that may cause significant 

hann to  fish or wildlife species or habitat. 

(b) At least twenty-five percent of the funds available pursuant to this section shall be allocated for 

projects that directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

75505. (a) The sum of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) shall be available to the Natural 

Resources Agency for projects that support the implementation of the settlement agreement to restore the San 

Joaquin River referenced in Section 2080.2 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(b) Of the funds authorized by this section, two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be available 

for projects that support implementation of the water management goal of the settlement, including projects to 

restore capacity of the Friant-Kem Canal that was lost due to subsidence.  For the purposes of awarding funding 

under this section, a cost share from nonstate sources of not less than fifty percent (50%) of the total costs of the 

project shall be required. 

12 

(c) Of the funds authorized by this section, two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be available 

for projects to implement the restoration goal of the settlement. 

(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the Secretary finds that any of the following conditions 

occurred, all of the unissued bonds identified for the purpose of this section, and all  monies that have been 

allocated but not expended for the purpose of this section, shall be reallocated to the purposes of, and shall  be 

authorized, issued, and appropriated in accordance with, subdivision (t): 

(I) The Settlement Act (Title X, Subtitle A, Part I of Public Law 111-11) is amended without the written consent 

of all of the parties to the settlement. 

(2) The settlement agreement referenced in  Section 2080.2 of the Fish and Game Code is not being implemented. 

For purposes of this section, a fai lure to implement the Settlement includes, but is not limited to: 

(i) The Bureau of Reclamation's failu re  to release Restoration Flows and dedicate those flows  to instream 

beneficial use to the extent possible, from  Friant Dam to the confluence with the Merced River and thence 

downstream to the Delta, in compliance with and consistent with the conditions of the settlement, applicable 

water rights order, and Settlement Act. 

(ii) The failure to reintroduce salmon to the Restoration Area, consistent with the requirements of the settlement, 

existing pennits, and Settlement Act. 

(3) The United States fails  to appropriate funding for implementation of the settlement in any fiscal year. 

(e) This section shall be implemented consistent with the requirements of the settlement and Settlement 

Act. No provision in  this section shall be implemented or interpreted in a way that violates the contracts clauses of 

the Constitution of the State of California or the Constitution of the United States. 

( f) For the purposes of subdivision ( d): 

(I) Any funds reallocated from subdivision (b) shall be equally allocated in accordance with subdivision 

(a) of Section 75520 and subdivision (k) of Section 75610. 

(2) Any funds reallocated from subdivision (c) shall be reallocated to the Wildlife Conservation Board for 

the protection and restoration of fish and wildlife habitat and for public access projects along the San Joaquin 

River and its tributaries.  At least twenty-five percent (25%) of these reallocated funds shall be used for projects 

that benefit disadvantaged communities. 

CHAPTER 4. IMPROVING CLIMATE RESILIENCE OF NATURAL SYSTEMS 

ARTICLE 1. CLIMA TE RESILIENCE AND NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION 

75510.  Funds allocated in this chapter shall be available for the planning, development and 

implementation of projects that reduce vulnerability to climate change impacts of the state's water, forest, and 

13 

agricultural resources; protect or restore natural systems and fish and wildlife habitat; improve the climate 

resilience of urban areas, wildlands, and natural resources; provide for climate adaptation; or improve the abi lity 

of natural systems to buffer the impacts of climate change; or a combination thereof. Activities funded pursuant to 

this chapter shall  be consistent with the state's Climate Adaptation Strategy and objectives as  provided in Section 

71153 and Section 71154. 

75520. (a) The sum of three hundred five million dollars ($305,000,000)  is hereby continuously 

approptiated from  the fund,  without regard to fiscal years, to the Wildlife Conservation Board for the protection 

or restoration of natural systems and wildlife habitat. Projects must accomplish one or more of the following 

objectives: 

(I ) Promotes the recovery of threatened and endangered species. 

(2) Provides co1Tidors  linking separate habitat areas to  prevent fragmentation. 

(3) Protects significant natural landscapes and ecosystems such as redwoods, mixed conifer forests,  oak 

woodlands, ripatian habitat,  wetlands,  grasslands, desert ecosystems and other significant habitat areas. 

( 4) Supports climate adaptation and improves the resilience of natural systems. 

(5) Promotes public access to conserved areas. 

(6)  Improves the condition of native fish and wildlife including species of special concern. 

(7) Controls invasive plants or insects that degrade wi ldlife conidors or habitat linkages, inhibit the 

recovery of threatened and endangered species, or reduce the climate resilience of a natural system. 

(8) Provides restoration and improvements for habitat  areas and ecological reserves operated by the 

Department of Fish and Wildlife. 

(9) Provides infonnation on multi-benefit conservation outcomes through decision support tools and co(cid:173)

investment models that drive sustainable land use decisions. 

(b) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a) , not less than sixty million dollars 

($60,000,000) shall be available for projects that advance the conservation objectives of natural community 

conservation plans adopted pursuant to the Natural Community Conservation Planning Act, commencing with 

Section 2800 of the Fish and Game Code, or other large-scale habitat conservation plans, which resolve resource 

conflicts by balancing communitywide conservation, planning and economic activities. Funding pursuant to this 

paragraph shall not be used to  offset mitigation obligations otherwise required, but may be used as part of a 

funding partnership to enhance, expand or augment conservation efforts required as mitigation. 

(c) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), not less than thirty million dollars 

($30,000,000) shall be available for implementation of wildlife corridors identified by the South Coast Wildlands 

Project, with priority given to projects necessary to provide habitat linkages impacted by state highways. Funds 

allocated pursuant to this provision shall be expended in accordance with the procedure in Section 79572(a)(2) of 

14 

the Water Code. Grant applicants shall identify the feasibility of private donations to any project under this 

subdivision and shall recommend to the Wildlife Conservation Board an appropriate matching fund amount. 

(d) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), the sum of thirty million dollars 

($30,000,000) shall be available for grazing land protection pursuant to  the California Rangeland, Grazing Land 

and Grassland Protection Act, commencing with Section 10330 of Division  10.4 of the Public Resources Code. 

(e) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), the sum of thirty million dollars 

($30,000,000) shall be available for oak woodland preservation pursuant to  Article 3.5 (commencing with Section 

1360) of Chapter 4 of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code. 

(f)  Of the amount made  available pursuant to subdivision (a), the sum often million dollars ($ 10,000,000) 

shall be available to assist fanners in integrating agricultural activities with ecosystem restoration and wildlife 

protection.  P1io1ity shall be given to projects that include partnerships with resource conservation districts. 

(g) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), the sum of five million dollars 

($5,000,000) shall be available for grants to  wildlife rehabilitation facilities operated by nongovernmental entities. 

(h) The Wildlife Conservation Board may expend funds available under this section  for the protection and 

restoration of lands and resources that are under threat as  a result of federal actions that reduce or eliminate 

existing protections. 

(i) In implementing this section, special consideration may be given  to  the acquisition of lands that are in 

deferred certification areas of county local coastal plans. 

(j)  Of the funds available pursuant to subdivision (a), at least twenty five percent (25%) shall be allocated 

for projects benefitting disadvantaged communities and low-income families.  Eligible projects may include, but 

are not limited to, community access programs and infrastructure to support public visitation on natural lands 

owned by public agencies or nonprofit organizations that provide access free of charge and focus on diverse and 

inclusive public visitation . 

(k) Up 

to three percent (3%) of the funding available pursuant to this section shall be available to the 

Wildlife Conservation Board to develop and implement strategies and programs to facilitate environmental review 

and pennitting for restoration projects funded pursuant to this division . 

75530. The sum of sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) shall  be available to the Department of 

Conservation for watershed restoration and conservation projects on agricultural lands, rangelands, and forested 

lands as  follows: 

(a) The sum of twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000) shall be used for grants pursuant to Section 9084 

of the Public Resources Code. 

(b) The sum  of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall  be used for the purposes of Division 10.2 

( commencing with Section 10200) of the Public Resources Code. 

15 

(c) The sum often million dollars ($10,000,000) shall be used for the Watershed Coordinator Grant 

Program. 

(d) The sum of fi ve million dollars ($5,000,000) shall be used for restoration activities to control or 

eradicate invasive plants. 

(e) Up to  10 percent of the funds available pursuant to this section may be allocated for technical 

assistance. 

75540. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available to the Wildlife Conservation 

Board for grants to implement conservation actions and habitat enhancement actions that measurably advance the 

conservation objectives of Regional Conservation Investment Strategies approved pursuant to Chapter 9 

( commencing with Section  1850) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code. Where such actions are used to create 

mitigation values or mitigation credits, the grant funds shall either be repaid to the Wildlife Conservation Board 

or shall, with the concurrence of the Wildlife Conservation Board, be used by the grantee to implement additional 

conservation actions or habitat enhancement actions. In implementing this section, the Wildlife Conservation 

Board may make grants, expenditures or loans to enhance the quality and availability of conservation data and for 

the development of Regional Conservation Investment Strategies pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with 

Section 1850) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code. 

75550. The sum of one hundred forty five million dollars ($145,000,000) shall be available for urban 

greening and climate resiliency projects that improve water and air quality,  conserve water, reduce energy 

consumption, or provide other community benefits or a combination thereof.  Priority  shall be given to  projects 

that provide multiple benefits, serve communities with the greatest need; and facilitate joint use of public 

resources and investments including schools. 

(a) Of the amount made available pursuant to this section: 

(I) Thirty five million dollars ($35,000,000) shall be available to  the Department of Forestry and Fire 

Protection for grants to local agencies and nonprofit organizations pursuant to the Urban Forestry Act, 

commencing with Section 4799.06. Not less than ten million dollars ($10,000,000) of these funds  may be 

available to  the Depa11ment of Forestry and Fire Protection for projects to  protect urban forests from  pests and 

disease. 

(2) Sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) shall be available to the Strategic Growth Council for the purposes 

of subdivision (c) of Section 75065 for grants to local and regional agencies and nonprofit organizations to 

develop sustainable communities, urban greening, and climate adaptation plans and greenprints. 

(3) Fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available to the Strategic Growth Council for the purposes 

of Section 75129 for grants to local agencies and non-profit organizations for urban greening projects . 

(b) At least 50 percent of the funds available pursuant to each paragraph in subdivision ( a)  shall be 

allocated for projects serving disadvantaged and low-income communities. For paragraphs (2) and (3), at least 

16 

one-third of this amount shall be made available for cities with a population of not more than 40,000 residents and 

for unincorporated communities. 

75560. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be deposited into the California Climate 

Resilience Account pursuant to subdivision ( d) of Section 31012 to assist coastal communities in adapting to 

climate change. Funds may be used for planning and projects that address sea level rise, ocean acidification, 

protection and restoration of fish and wildlife habitat, and other impacts of climate change.  Additional 

consideration shall be given to assisting communities reliant on commercial fisheries and to communities that are 

the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. 

75570. (a) The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) shall be available to the California 

Conservation Corps for projects to  conserve water, improve water quality, restore watersheds and riparian zones, 

rehabilitate or improve local and state parks, implement regional and community-level fuel  load reduction 

projects, and for facility or equipment acquisition, development, restoration and rehabilitation. 

(b) Not less than fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) shall be allocated for grants to certified local 

community conservation corps, as defined in  Section  14507.5. 

75580.  The sum often million dollars ($10,000,000) shall  be available to the Natural Resources  Agency 

for grants to  other nonprofit entities that provide job training and education opportunities for veterans, foster care 

recipients, fannworkers, or local youth in conservation, restoration, stonnwater management, and water system 

improvement projects. Entities eligible to receive funding pursuant to subdivision (b)  of Section 75570 are not 

eligible to receive funding under this section. 

75590. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available to the Wildlife Conservation 

Board for grants to  public agencies, nonprofit organizations and resource conservation districts for projects that 

are designed to provide benefits to fish and wildlife through voluntary actions on privately owned lands and that 

demonstrate quantifiable and measurable habitat enhancement for wildlife. 

(a) Funds provided pursuant to this section shall assist landowners in developing and implementing 

wildlife friendly practices, restoration projects, and other conservation actions on private lands.  Projects may be 

short-tenn in  nature, and shall be designed to be appropriately flexible and responsive to the highly variable 

habitat needs required by fish and wildlife. 

(b) Projects may use habitat credit exchange mechanisms to improve project outcomes. 

(c) Up to ten percent (10%) of the funds provided by this section may be used for monitoring to evaluate 

project success and provide for adaptive management as needed. 

75600. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available to the University of California for 

the Natural Reserve System for matching grants for land acquisition and for the construction and development of 

facilities  that will be used for research and training to improve the management of natural lands and the 

preservation of California' s wildlife resources. Priority shall be given to projects that advance research on the 

17 

protection of lands and rivers that are sources of drinking water supplies;  reduction of greenhouse gas emissions; 

impacts of climate change; and adaptation of natural systems to the impacts of climate change. 

ARTICLE 2.  PROTECTING RIVERS. LAKES AND STREAMS 

75610. The sum of five hundred seventy million dollars ($570,000,000) shall be available for the 

protection and restoration of rivers, lakes and natural lands, improvement of public recreation facilities, and for 

grants to local agencies and nonprofit organizations to increase community access to parks and recreational 

opportunities for underserved urban communities in accordance with the following schedule: 

(a) The sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall be available to the San Joaquin River 

Conservancy for river parkway projects pursuant to  Division  22.5 (commencing with Section 32500). At least 

sixty percent of the funds avai lable pursuant to  this subdivision shall be allocated for projects that directly benefit 

disadvantaged communities. 

(b) The sum of one hundred and twenty million dollars ($120,000,000) shall be available for projects 

within the watersheds of the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers according to the following schedule: 

(I ) $60,000,000 to the San Gabriel and Lower Los Angeles Rivers and Mountains Conservancy pursuant 

to  Division 22.8 (commencing with Section 32600). 

(2) $60,000,000 to  the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy pursuant to Division 23 (commencing with 

Section 33000) which may also be expended within the areas described in  Sections 33204.3 and 33204.4. 

(c) The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) shall be available for the Coachella Valley Mountains 

Conservancy pursuant to Division 23.5 (commencing with Section 33500). At least twenty-five percent (25%) of 

the funds  available pursuant to this subdivision shall be allocated for projects that directly benefit disadvantaged 

communities. 

(d) The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall  be available for projects to expand and improve 

the Santa Ana River Parkway pursuant to Chapter 4.6 ( commencing with Section 31170) of Division 21. At least 

forty percent ( 40%) of the funds available pursuant to this subdivision shall be allocated for projects that directly 

benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(e) The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available for the Sierra Nevada Conservancy 

pursuant to Division 23.3 (commencing with Section 33300). 

(f) The sum of forty million dollars ($40,000,000) shall be available for the California Tahoe 

Conservancy pursuant to Title 7.42 ( commencing with Section 66905) of the Government Code. 

(g) The sum of twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000) shall be available to the Lower Ame1ican River 

Conservancy Program, pursuant to Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 5845) of Division 5.  At least one(cid:173)

third of the funds shall be allocated  for projects within or immediately adjacent to the City of Sacramento. 

18 

(h) The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) shall be available for the Sacramento-San Joaquin 

Delta Conservancy pursuant to  Division 22.3 (commencing with Section 32300). 

(i) The sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall be available for the San Diego River 

Conservancy pursuant to Division 22.9 (commencing with Section 32630). 

(j) The sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall be available for the Baldwin Hills Conservancy 

pursuant to Division 22.7 (commencing with Section 32550). Projects funded pursuant to this subdivision shall 

directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(k) The sum ofone hundred forty five million dollars ($145,000,000) shall be available to the secretary 

for proj ects in accordance with the California River Parkways Act of2004 pursuant to Chapter 3.8 (commencing 

with Section 5750) of Division 5. 

( 1) Of the funds available pursuant to this subdivision, at least fifteen million dollars ($ 15,000,000) shall 

be available for river parkway projects within the San Diego Bay watershed. 

(2) Of the funds available pursuant to this subdivision, at least fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) shall 

be available for river parkway projects along the Santa Margarita River in San Diego County. 

(3) At least forty percent of the funds available pursuant to this subdivision shall be allocated for projects 

that directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(I) The sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall be available to the Department of Water 

Resources for the Urban Streams Restoration Program pursuant to  Section 7048 of the Water Code. At least forty 

percent of the funds  available pursuant to this subdivision shall be allocated for projects that directly benefit 

disadvantaged communities. 

ARTICLE 3.  PROTECTING BEACHES. BAYS.  COASTAL  WATERS AND COASTAL LANDS 

75620. Funds allocated in this article shall be available for the protection of beaches, bays and coastal 

waters, coastal forests, and coastal watersheds, including projects to prevent contamination and degradation of 

coastal waters and watersheds, proj ects to prevent the destruction of coastal forests, projects to protect and restore 

the natural habitat values of coastal waters and lands, projects to help coastal communities adapt to the impacts of 

climate change including sea level rise, and projects and expenditures to promote access to and enjoyment of the 

coastal resources of the state. 

75630. (a) The sum of two hundred thirty million dollars ($230,000,000) shall be available to  the State 

Coastal Conservancy for the protection of and public access to beaches, bays, coastal forests, and coastal 

watershed resources. Eligible projects include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(1) Preserving agricultural lands pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 3 11 50) of Division 21 

and enhancing carbon sequestration through agricultural practices. 

19 

(2) Completing trails within the geographic jurisdiction of Division 21  ( commencing with Section 31000). 

(3) Planning and implementation activities to address the risks and impacts of climate change, sea level 

rise, and associated extreme events to coastal and bay communities and natural resources. 

( 4) Converting, restoring, rehabilitating or repurposing properties fonnally operating as industrial plants 

to create pennanently protected open space, wildlife habitat and recreational opportunities. 

(5) Restoring and protecting coastal forests. 

(6) Restoring or protecting coastal wetlands and riparian habitat. 

(7) Protection of Native American cultural sites. 

(8) Protection of wildlife corridors. 

(9) Enhancing carbon sequestration and watershed health in urban areas through green infrastructure 

projects. 

(b) Of the amount made available pursuant to  this section, fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be 

available for projects and grants to  improve existing or develop new  lower cost overnight coastal accommodations 

on lands owned or operated by public agencies or nonprofit organizations. 

( c)  At least thirty percent of the funds available pursuant to this section shall be allocated for projects that 

facilitate public access to  the coast for or otherwise benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(d) In  implementing this section, special consideration may be given to: 

(I) Projects that protect lands within or adjacent to  areas designated as federal National Monuments prior 

to January 20, 2017. 

(2) The acquisition of lands  that are in deferred  certification areas of county local coastal plans. 

75640. The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall be available to the Ocean Protection 

Council for grants consistent with Section 35650. P1i01ity shall be given to projects that:(!) reduce the amount of 

pollutants that flow to coastal rivers and streams, beaches, bays, coastal estuaries, and near-shore ecosystems; (2) 

protect coastal and near-shore ocean resources from the impacts of climate change including rising sea levels, 

stonn surges, ocean acidification, damage to  fish and wildlife habitat, and related ha_zards; and (3) protect or 

restore beaches, coastal estuaries, coastal watersheds, bays, and near-shore ecosystems including marine protected 

areas. 

75650. (a) The sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be available to  the State Coastal 

Conservancy for the San Francisco Bay Area Conservancy Program (Chapter 4.5 of Division 21 ). At least twenty(cid:173)

five percent (25%) of the funds available pursuant to  this subdivision that are not allocated pursuant to 

subdivision (b) shall be allocated for projects that directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(b) Of the funds identified in this section, one hundred million dollars ($ 100,000,000) shall be available 

for matching grants for flood management, wetlands restoration, and other projects consistent with Article 2 

(commencing with Section 66704.5) of Chapter 5 of Title 7.25 of the Government Code.  For purposes of this 

20 

section, matching grants may provide funding up to  the amount contributed for an eligible project by local 

governments, regional governments, the federal government, private parties, and the San Francisco Bay 

Restoration Authority.  No grant shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the project.  At least twenty five 

percent (25%) of the funds available pursuant to  this subdivision shall be allocated for projects that directly 

benefit disadvantaged communities. For purposes of this subdivision, the State Coastal Conservancy shall  use a 

definition of"disadvantaged communities" that is developed pursuant to Title 7.25 (commencing with Section 

66700) of the Government Code. 

75655. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,00) shall be available pursuant to  Division 23 

(commencing with Section 33000) for the preservation, protection, and restoration of lands and waters in  the 

watersheds of Santa Monica Bay and adjacent Ventura County watersheds. 

75660. The sum of one hundred fifty million ($150,000,000) shall be available for grants and 

expenditures for the protection, restoration and improvement of coastal forest watersheds, including managed 

forest lands, forest reserve areas, redwood forests, and other forest  types. Eligible project types shall include 

projects that improve water quality and supply, increase coastal watershed storage capacity, reduce fire risk, 

provide habitat for fish and wildlife or improve coastal forest health. Funds shall be allocated as follows: 

(a) The sum ofone hundred million ($100,000,000) shall  be available to  the Wildlife Conservation Board. 

(b) The sum of fifty million ($50,000,000) shall be available to the State Coastal Conservancy. 

75670. The sum of seventy million ($70,000,000) shall be available to the State Coastal Conservancy for 

the removal or conversion of outdated industrial faci lities that are on the coast or within coastal watersheds to 

protect water quality, reduce environmental degradation, restore natural ecosystems, enhance recreational access 

to  natural areas and provide other community benefits. Eligible projects shall include identification of conversion 

opportunities, planning and environmental review costs and conversion costs, ecosystem restoration and 

protection, and providing matching funds for multi-benefit projects that provide significant community access and 

ecosystem benefits . 

75680. The sum of eighty million ($80,000,000) shall be available to the State Coastal Conservancy for 

restoration of Southern California Steelhead habitat consistent with the Depar1ment of Fish and Wildlife's 

Steelhead Restoration and Management Plan and the National Marine Fisheries Southern California Steelhead 

Recovery Plan.  Highest priority shall be on projects that remove significant barriers to steelhead migration and 

include other habitat restoration and associated infrastructure improvements. 

CHAPTER 5.  RESTORING AND IMPROVING STATE AND LOCAL PARKS 

75690. (a)  The sum of eight hundred million dollars ($800,000,000) shall be available to the department 

for the creation, expansion and enhancement of safe neighborhood parks in park-poor neighborhoods in 

21 

accordance with the Statewide Park Development and Community Revitalization Act of 2008's competitive grant 

program described in Chapter 3.3 (commencing with Section 5640) of Division 5. 

(b) The department shall update guidelines for the grant program before granting funds  pursuant to this 

section. The guidelines shall require that any water fixtures , landscaping, and irrigation methods that are part of a 

project be designed to advance efficient use of water. 

(c) In detennining which grantees and projects to  fund, the department shall consider whether the 

prospective grantee and its project partners have the capacity to  implement the project in  a timely manner. 

( d) Of the amount available pursuant to this section, not less than 20 percent shall be available for the 

rehabilitation, repurposing, or substantial improvement of existing park infrastructure in communities of the state 

that will lead to increased use and enhanced user experiences. 

(e) Of the amount available pursuant to this section, to cotTect historic under-investments in the Central 

Valley, Inland Empire, gateway, dese1t, and rural communities, the sum of one hundred million dollars 

($100,000,000) shall be available for local park improvement grants to  the communities identified by the 

department as park deficient within those areas for active recreational projects, including aquatic centers, to 

encourage youth health, fitness, and recreational pursuits. Projects that include the donation of land, materials, or 

volunteer services and that demonstrate collaborations of multiple entities and the leveraging of scarce resources 

may be given special consideration. Entities that receive a grant under this section may also be eligible to receive 

other grants under subdivision (a) of Section 75690. 

(f) The department shall give priority to projects that: (1) protect or improve water quality or supplies, (2) 

conserve water, (3) replace non-native vegetation with water saving landscapes, (4) incorporate stonnwater 

capture features that increase water supplies, reduce water pollution, reduce flooding,  or a combination thereof; 

(5) provide positive recreational, educational, and employment opportunities for underserved youth and young 

adults from disadvantaged and low income communities; or provide a combination thereof. 

75700. (a) The sum of five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) shall be available to  the department 

for the restoration, preservation and protection of state park facilities and units.  Eligible project types include, but 

are not limited to: 

( 1) Protection of natural resources to provide climate resilience, water supply, and water quality benefits. 

(2) Enhancement of community access to  state park facilities and units including protection and 

improvement of lands adjacent to state park facilities to improve access or management efficiency. 

(3) The provision of lower cost overnight accommodations in ways that enhance access and recreational 

opportunities for disadvantaged community residents and low-income park visitors. 

( 4) The protection of cultural and historical resources. 

(5) Implementation of projects that address the department' s backlog of deferred maintenance. 

22 

(6) Improvements to infrastructure including stonnwater and sewer modifications to protect water quality, 

impo11ant park resources and public health. 

(b) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a) fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) shall 

be available for enterprise projects  that facilitate new or enhanced park use and user experiences, utilize green 

design practices, leverage public-private partnerships, and increase revenue generation to support operations of 

the department. 

( c) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall 

be available for grants to  local  agencies and nonprofit organizations that operate a unit of the state park system to 

address urgent need for the repair, restoration, enhancement, or replacement of aging infrastructure. 

(d) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), not less than fifty million dollars 

($50,000,000) shall be available to  the department for the protection, restoration, and enhancement of the natural 

resource values of the State Park System, including: 

( 1) Protection and improvement of water quality and biological health in streams, aquifers, and estuarine 

ecosystems. 

(2) Protection and restoration of natural resources and ecosystems representative of Cali fornia' s diverse 

landscapes, including landfonn, habitat, and biological community restoration. 

(3) Acquisition, rehabilitation, restoration, protection and expansion of wi ldlife corridors including 

projects to improve connectivity and reduce barriers between  habitat areas. 

(4) Improvement of native ecosystem resilience and adaptation to climate change. 

(e) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) shall  be 

available for  the protection, restoration, preservation and interpretation of lands and resources that are of cultural 

and archeological significance, including but not limited to, projects that protect lands of importance to  federally 

recognized Native American  tribes, or non-federally recognized California Native American  tribes listed on the 

California Tribal Consultation List maintained by the Native American Heritage Commission. 

(t) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), no less than fifty million dollars 

($50,000,000) shall be available for lower cost coastal accommodations on park lands or lands owned or operated 

by other public agencies, or nonprofit organizations. 

(g) Of the amount made available pursuant to subdivision (a), not less than twenty million dollars 

($20,000,000) shall be available for projects to enhance the health of redwood forests  in order to accelerate old 

growth characteristics, maximize carbon sequestration, improve water quality and build climate resilience. 

(h) Funds made available by this section may be used for the planning, pennitting, monitoring and 

maintenance of projects for the period necessary to ensure their successful implementation. 

(i) The department may expend funds available under this section for the protection and restoration of 

lands and resources that are under threat as a result of federal actions that reduce or eliminate existing protections. 

23 

(j) The department, in expending the funding available under this section, shall endeavor, where practical, 

to partner with cities, counties, nonprofit organizations, and nongovernmental organizations to maximize 

leveraging opportunities to enhance tourism, visitation, and visitor experiences. 

(k) At least twenty-five percent of the funds  available pursuant to this section shall be allocated for 

projects that directly benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(I) The department shall give priority to  projects that protect or improve water quality, conserve water, 

replace non-native vegetation with water saving native plants, provide safe d1inking water for park visitors, or 

otherwise protect water quality and water supplies. 

75710. (a) The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall be available to  the department for 

grants for nature education and research facilities and equipment to nonprofit organizations and public institutions, 

including natural history museums, aquariums, Pacific Flyway-related education and interpretive centers, research 

facilities and botanical gardens.  Eligible grantees include: institutions that combine the study of natural science 

with preservation, demonstration and education programs that serve diverse populations; state park cooperating 

associations; institutions that provide collections and programs related to the relationship of Native American 

cultures to  the environment;  institutions for marine wildlife conservation research; the University of California 

Institute for California Water Resources ; centers for education and interpretation related to  the Pacific Flyway; 

and institutions that combine study of natural resources with urban nature, coastal ecosystems, and human and 

environmental history. The department  shall give priority to grants that facilitate public education about the 

benefits that natural systems provide to  California' s water supplies, water quality, aquatic ecosystems, and other 

public resources. Grants may be used for buildings, structures and exhibit galleries to inspire and educate the 

public about science and the environment and for marine wildlife conservation research equipment and facilities. 

(b) At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the funds available pursuant to this section shall be allocated for 

projects that benefit disadvantaged communities. 

75720. For purposes of this chapter, "district"  means any regional park district, regional park and open(cid:173)

space district, or regional open-space district fonned pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 5500) of 

Chapter 3 of Division 5, any recreation and park district fonned pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 

5780) of Division 5, or any authority fonned pursuant to Division 26 ( commencing with Section 35 100). With 

respect to any community or unincorporated region that is not included within a district, and in which no city or 

county provides parks or recreational areas or facilities, "district" also means any other entity, including, but not 

limited to, a district operating multiple-use parklands pursuant to  Division 20 ( commencing with Section 71000) 

of the Water Code, that is authorized by statute to operate and manage parks or recreational areas or facilities, 

employs a full-time park and recreation director, offers year-round park and recreation services on land and 

facilities owned by the entity, and allocates a substantial portion of its annual operating budget to parks or 

recreation areas or facilities. 

24 

75730. (a)  The sum of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) shall be available to the department 

for local park rehabilitation, creation, and improvement grants to local governments on a per capita basis. Grant 

recipients shall be encouraged to utilize awards to increase water efficiency at existing parks, improve water 

quality, incorporate stonnwater capture features to improve water supplies and to  prevent water pollution, 

rehabilitate existing infrastructure and address deficiencies in neighborhoods lacking access to the outdoors. 

(b)  Unless the entity has been identified as  a disadvantaged community, an entity that receives an award 

pursuant to this section shall be required to provide a match of 20 percent as a local share. 

(c)(l)  The department shall allocate 60 percent of the funds  available pursuant to subdivision (a) to  cities 

and districts, other than a regional park district, regional park and open-space district, open-space authority, or 

regional open-space district.  Each city' s and district's allocation shall  be in the same  ratio as the city's or district's 

population is to the combined total of the state' s population that is included in  incorporated and  unincorporated 

areas within the county, except that each city or district shall  be entitled to a minimum allocation of two hundred 

thousand dollars ($200,000). If the boundary of a city overlaps the boundary of a district, the population in the 

overlapping area shall be attributed to each jurisdiction in proportion to the extent to  which each operates and 

manages parks and recreational areas and facilities for that population. If the boundary ofa city overlaps the 

boundary of a district, and in the area of overlap the city does not operate and manage parks and recreational areas 

and facilities, all grant funds  for that area shall be allocated to the dist1ict. 

(2)  On or before April 1, 2020, a city and a district that are subject to paragraph (1 ), and whose 

boundaries overlap, shall collaboratively develop and submit to the department a specific plan for allocating the 

grant funds  in accordance with the formula specified in paragraph ( 1 ).  If, by that date, the plan has not been 

developed and submitted to  the department, the director shall detennine the allocation of the grant funds between 

the affected jurisdictions . 

( d)  ( 1)  The department shall allocate forty percent ( 40%)of the funds available pursuant to subdivision 

(a) to  counties and regional park districts, regional park and open-space districts, open-space authorities fonned 

pursuant to  Division 26 ( commencing with Section 35100), and regional open-space districts fonned pursuant to 

Article 3 (commencing with Section 5500) of Chapter 3 of Division 5. 

(2)  Each county' s allocation under paragraph ( I) shal l be in the same ratio that the county's population is 

to the total state population, except that each county shall be entitled to a minimum allocation of four hundred 

thousand dollars ($400,000). 

(3)  In any county that embraces all or part of the tenitory of a regional park district,  regional park and 

open-space district, open-space authority, or regional open-space district, and whose board of directors is not the 

county board of supervisors , the amount allocated to the county shall be apportioned between that district and the 

county in proportion to  the population of the county that is included within the tenitory of the district and the 

population of the county that is outside the tenitory of the district. 

25 

(e)  For the purpose of making  the calculations required by this section, population shall be detenn ined by 

the department, in cooperation with the Department of Finance, on the basis of the most recent verifiable census 

data and other verifiable population data that the department may require to be furnished by the applicant city, 
county, or district. 

(f)  The People of California intend all  recipients of funds pursuant to  this section to use those funds  to 

supplement local revenues in existence on the effective date of the act adding this chapter. To receive an 

allocation pursuant to this section, the recipient shall  not reduce the amount of funding otherwise available to be 

spent on parks or other projects eligible for funds under this chapter in its jurisdiction. A one-time allocation of 

other funding that has been expended for parks or other projects, but that is not available on an ongoing basis, 

shall not be considered when calculating a recipient's annual expenditures. For purposes of this subdivision, the 

Controller may request fiscal data from recipients for the preceding three fiscal years.  Each recipient shall furnish 

the data to the Controller no later than 120 days after receiving the request from  the Controller. 

(g)  The director of the department shall prepare and adopt criteria and procedures for evaluating 

applications for grants allocated pursuant to this section. The application shall be accompanied by certification 

that the proj ect is consistent with the park and recreation element of the applicable city or county general plan or 

the district park recreation plan, as the case may be. 

(h)  To utilize available grant funds as effectively as possible, overlapping and adjoining jurisdictions and 

applicants with s imilar objectives are encouraged to  combine projects and submit a joint application. A recipient 

may allocate all or a portion of its per capita share for a regional or state project 

(i)  The director of the department shall annually forward a statement of the total amount to be 

approp1iated each fiscal  year for projects approved for grants pursuant to this section to the Director of Finance 

for inclusion in the annual Budget Act. A list of eligible jurisdictions and the amount of grant funds to be 

allocated to each jurisdiction shall also be made available by the department. 

(j)  Funds appropriated pursuant to this section shall be encumbered by the recipient within three years 

from the date the appropriation is effective. Regardless of the date of encumbrance of the granted funds, the 

recipient is expected to complete all funded projects within eight years of the effective date of the appropriation. 

CHAPTER 6.  ACCOUNT ABILITY 

75770.  (a)  The Department of Finance shall  provide for an independent audit of expenditures pursuant to 

this division. 

(b)  If an audit, required by statute, of any entity that receives funding authorized by this division is 

conducted pursuant to state law and reveals any impropriety, the California State Auditor or the Controller may 

conduct a full audit of any or all of the activities of that entity. 

26 

(c)  The state agency issuing any grant or loan with funding authorized by this division shall require 

adequate reporting of the ex pen di tures of the funding  from  the grant or loan. 

( d)  Prior to soliciting projects pursuant to this division, state agencies shall submit guidelines to  the 

secretary. The secretary shall verify that the guidelines are consistent with applicable statutes and for all  the 

purposes enumerated in this division. The secretary shall post an electronic fonn of the guidelines submitted by 

state agencies and the subsequent verifications on the Natural Resources Agency' s Internet Web site. 

75780. The Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency and Chair of the state board shall: 

(a) Publish a list of all program and project expenditures pursuant to this division not less than quarterly, 

in written form , and shall post an electronic form of the  list on  the agency's Internet Web site in a downloadable 

spreadsheet fonnat. The spreadsheet and other infonnation shall include infonnation about the location and 

footprint of each fund ed  project, the project's objectives, the status of the project, anticipated outcomes, any 

matching moneys provided for the project by the grant recipient, any benefits the project provides to 

disadvantaged communities, and the applicable section of this chapter pursuant to which the  grant recipient 

received moneys. 

(b) Include any new acquisition project funded pursuant to  this division in a statewide spatial database 

that shows the location, ownership, and public access opportunities for parklands. 

(c) Include any conservation easement purchased with funds pursuant to this division in a statewide 

database of conservation easements . 

(d) The Natural Resources Agency and state board may use funding under this division for the purpose 

of supporting databases for these purposes. 

75790. The Secretary shall appoint a citizen advisory committee to review the annual audit and to identify 

and recommend actions to ensure that the intent and purposes of this division are met by the agencies responsible 

for implementation of this division. 

75791. A state agency that receives funding to administer a grant program under this division shall report 

to the Legislature by January  1, 2027 on its expenditures pursuant to  this division and the public benefits received 

from those expenditures including, but not limited to, benefits to disadvantaged communities . 

CHAPTER 7. GENERAL PROVISIONS 

75800. As used in this division, the following tenns have the following meanings: 

(a) " Acquisition" means the acquisition of a fee  interest or any other interest in real  property including 

conservation easements, leases and development rights. 

(b)  '·Community access"  means engagement programs, technical assistance, or facilities that maximize 

safe and equitable physical admittance, especially for low-income communities, to natural or cultural resources, 

27 

community education, or recreational amenities.  Projects may include, but are not limited to, transportation, 

physical activity programming, resource interpretation, multi-lingual translation, natural science, workforce 

development and career pathways, education, or communication related to water, parks, climate, coastal 

protection, and other outdoor pursuits. 

(c) ··conservation actions on private lands" means projects with willing landowners that involve the 

adaptive flexible management or protection of natural resources in response to changing conditions and threats to 

habitat and wildlife.  The actions may include the acquisition of conservation interests or fee interests in the land. 

These projects result in habitat conditions on private lands that, when managed adaptively over time, contribute to 

the long-tenn health and resiliency of vital ecosystems and enhance wildlife populations. 

(d) " Delta" means the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta. 

(e) "Department"  means the Depa1tment of Parks and Recreation. 

(t) "Development'' 

includes, but is not limited to the physical  improvement of real prope1ty  including the 

construction of facilities or structures. 

(g) '·Disadvantaged community" means a community with a  median household  income less than eighty 

percent (80%) of the statewide average. 

(h) " Fund·" means the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply,  Natural Resources Protection and 

Park Improvement Fund of 2018. 

(i) " Industrial facilities"  include mines, power plants, oil fields or portions of oil fields, manufacturing 

facilities or other similar facilities, that are closed or scheduled for closing or phase out by their owners. 

(j) " Interpretation" includes, but is not li mited to, a  visitor serving amenity that educates and 

communicates the significance and value of natural, historical, and cultural resources in a way that increases the 

understanding and enjoyment of these resources and that may utilize the expertise of a naturalist or other 

specialist skilled at educational interpretation. 

(k) "Nonprofit organization"  means any nonprofit corporation qualified to do business in California, and 

qualified under Section 501  (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 

(1) '·Preservation" means rehabilitation, stabilization, restoration, development, and reconstruction, or any 

combination of those activities. 

(m) "Protection"  means those actions necessary to  prevent harm or damage to persons, property, natural 

resources, or cultural resources, or those actions necessary to  allow the continued use, access and enjoyment of 

property or natural or cultural resources, including improvements to accommodate access for visitors with 

disabilities, and includes acquisition, development, restoration, preservation, community access, and 

interpretation. 

(n) "Restoration" means the improvement of physical structures or facilities and, in the case of natural 

systems and landscape features  includes, but is not limited to, projects for the control of erosion, stonn water 

28 

capture and storage or otherwise reduce stonn  water pollution, the control and elimination of invasive species, 

planting of native species, prescribed burning, fuel hazard reduction, fencing out threats  to existing or restored 

natural resources, road elimination, improving instream, riparian, or managed wetland habitat conditions, and 

other plant and wildlife habitat improvement to increase the natural system value of the property. Restoration 

projects shall include the planning, monitoring and reporting necessary to  ensure successful  implementation of the 
proj ect objectives. 

( o) "Secretary" means the  Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency. 

(p) '·Severely disadvantaged community" means a community  with a median household income less than 

sixty percent (60%) of the statewide average. 

(q) '·State Board'' means the State Water Resources Control Board. 

(r)  "Stormwater"  has the meaning set forth  in subdivision (e) of Section  10561.5 of the Water Code. 

75810.  (a) Applicants eligible to receive grants,  loans and contracts pursuant to  this division are public 

agencies, cities, counties, cities and counties, special districts, joint powers authotities, state universities 

(including uni versity-managed national laboratories), resource conservation districts, nonprofit organizations, 

public utilities, mutual water companies, public water systems as  defined  in subdivision (h) of Section 11 6275 of 

the Health  and Sa fety Code, urban water suppliers as defined in Section  I 06 17 of the Water Code, federally 

recognized Indian  tribes, federal agencies owning or managing land in California, and nonfederally recognized 

California Native American tribes listed on the Native American Heritage Commission's California Tribal 

Consultation List. State agencies granting funds pursuant to this division shall give. priority to  eligible applicants 

with experience in  planning, designing, and developing the types of projects receiving funding from  the agencies, 

or which have access to consulting help in these areas. 

(b)(I) To be eligible for funding under this division, a proj ect proposed by a public utility that is regulated 

by the Public Utilities Commission, or a mutual water company, shall have a clear and definite public purpose and 

the project shall benefit the customers of the watersystem and not the investors. 

(2) To be eligible for funding under this division, an urban water supplier shall have adopted and 

submitted an urban water management plan in accordance with the Urban Water Management Planning Act, Part 

2.6 (commencing with Section 10610) of Division 6 of the Water Code. 

(3) To be eligible for funding under this division, an agricultural water supplier shall have adopted and 

submitted an agricultural water management plan in accordance with the Agricultural Water Management 

Planning Act, Part 2.8 ( commencing with Section 10800) of Division 6 of the Water Code. 

(4) In  accordance with  Section 10608.56 of the Water Code, an agricultural water supplier or an urban 

water supplier is ineligible for grant funding under this division unless it complies  with the requirements of Part 

2.55 (commencing with Section 10608) of Division 6 of the Water Code. 

29 

75820. State entities providing grants pursuant to  this measure shall give additional priority to projects 

that expand job and or workforce development opportunities for veterans, residents of low-income communities, 

disconnected youth, fannworkers, and commercial fishennen whose livelihoods depend on fi sheries that have 

been significantly depleted. 

7582 l. (a) 1n projects  involving voluntary habitat restoration, water quality improvement and multi(cid:173)

benefit floodplain restoration each agency administe1ing provisions of this  division shall encourage interagency 

coordination and develop and utilize efficient project approval and permitting mechanisms, including but not 

limited to the provisions of Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section  1650) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game 

Code {regardless of whether that chapter is still in effect) and programmatic permits for voluntary habitat 

restoration, so as to avoid project delays and maximize the amount of money spent on project implementation. 

(b) Projects designed to primarily protect migratory birds through acquisition, easements, restoration or 

other projects shall be consistent with the plans and recommendations established by the federal Migratory Bird 

Joint Venture partnerships that encompass parts of California. 

(c) Any agency providing funds pursuant to this division to  disadvantaged communities or econom ically 

distressed areas  may provide funding to assist these communities in applying for that funding, including technical 

and grant wtiting assistance. These funds may be provided to nonprofit organizations  and local public agencies 

assisting these communities. 

(d) Any agency receiving funds  pursuant to  this division may contract for the services ofresource 

conservation districts pursuant to Section 9003 of the Public Resources  Code. 

(e) Agencies may count in-kind conttibutions up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total project cost as 

part of cost sharing. Agencies  may count the value of the donated land in a bargain sale as part of cost sharing. 

(f)  Agencies consideting proposals for acquisition of lands shall also consider the ability of the proposed 

final owner of the land to  maintain it in a condition that will protect the values for which it  is  to be acquired, and 

to prevent any problems that might occur on neighboting lands if the land is not properly managed. 

(g) Projects designed to  primarily protect riparian habitat through acquisition, easements, restoration or 

other projects shall consider the plans and recommendations established by the California Riparian Habitat 

Conservation Program pursuant to Chapter 4.1  ( commencing with Section  1385) of Division 2 of the Fish and 

Game Code. 

(h) Eligible grant costs shall include indirect costs as defined in federal Office of Management and 

Budget guidelines, as well as reasonable overhead costs. 

75822. To the extent consistent with the other provisions of this division, statewide agencies making 

grants pursuant to this  division shall seek to allocate funds equitably to eligible projects throughout the state, 

including northern and southern California, coastal and inland regions, and Sierra  and Cascade foothill and 

mountain regions. 

30 

75823. Funds provided by this division shall not be expended to pay the costs of the design, construction, 

operation, mitigation, or maintenance of Delta water conveyance facilities. Those costs shall  be the responsibility 

of the water agencies that benefit from  the design, construction, operation, mitigation, or maintenance of those 

faci lities. 

75824. (a) This division does not diminish, impair, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any area 

of origin, watershed of origin, county of origin, or any other water rights protections, including, but not limited to, 

rights to water appropriated prior to December 19, 19 14, provided under the law. This division does not limit or 

affect the application of Article  1.7 (commencing with Section 1215) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 2, 

Sections  10505,  10505.5,  111 28, 11460,  11461 ,  11462, and  11463, and Sections  12200 to  12220, inclusive of the 
Water Code. 

(b) For the purposes of this division, an area that utilizes water that has been diverted and conveyed from 

the Sacramento River hydrologic region, for use outside the Sacramento  River hydrologic region or the Delta, 

shall not be deemed to be immediately adjacent thereto or capable of being conveniently supplied with water 

therefrom by vittue or on account of the diversion and conveyance of that water through facilities that may be 

constructed for that purpose after January I, 20 18. 

(c) Nothing in  this division supersedes, limits, or otherwise modifies the applicability of Chapter 10 

(commencing with  Section 1700) of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Water Code, including petitions related to  any new 

conveyance constructed or operated in accordance with Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 85320)of Part 4 of 
Division 35 of the Water Code. 

(d) Unless otherwise expressly provided, nothing in this division supersedes, reduces, or otherwise affects 

existing legal protections, both procedural and substantive, relating to the State Board's regulation of diversion 

and use of water, including, but not limited to, water right priorities, the protection provided to municipal interests 

by Sections  l 06 and  l 06.5 of the Water Code, and changes  in water rights. Nothing in this division expands or 

otherwise alters the State Board's existing authority  to regulate the diversion and use of water or the courts' 

existing concurrent jurisdiction over California water rights. 

(e)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to affect the California Wild and Scenic Rivers Act 

(Chapter 1.4 (commencing with Section 5093.50) of Division 5) or the federa l Wild and Scenic Rivers Act ( 16 

U.S.C. Section 127 1 et seq.) and funds authorized pursuant to this division shall not be available for any project 

that could have an adverse effect on the values upon which a wild and scenic river or any other river is afforded 

protections pursuant to  the California Wild and Scenic Rivers Act or the federal Wild and Scenic Rivers Act. 

(f) Nothing in this division supersedes, limits, or otherwise modifies the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta 

Refonn Act of2009 (commencing with Section 85000 of the Water Code) or any other applicable law, including, 

but not limited to, Division 22. 3 (commencing with Section 32300) of the Public Resources Code. 75830. (a) An 

31 

amount that equals not more than five percent (5%) of the funds allocated for a grant program pursuant to this 

division may be used to pay the administrative costs of that program. 

(b) Unless otherwise specified, up to  ten percent (10%) of funds allocated for each program funded by 

this division may be expended for planning and monitoring necessary for the successful design, selection, and 

implementation of the projects authorized under that program. This section shall not otherwise restrict funds 

ordinarily used by an agency for '·preliminary plans,·•  "working drawings," and '·construction·• as defined in  the 

annual Budget Act for a capital outlay project or grant project 

( c) ( 1)  Unless otherwise specified, up  to  ten  percent ( l 0%)of the funds available pursuant to each chapter 

of this division may be allocated for technical assistance and outreach to disadvantaged communities. The agency 

administering the moneys sha ll operate a multidisciplinary technical assistance program for disadvantaged 

communities. 

(2) Funds used for providing technical assistance to disadvantaged communities may exceed ten percent 

( I 0%) of the funds  allocated if the state agency administeting the moneys detennines that there is a need for the 

additional  funding. 

(d) State agencies providing grants pursuant to this measure may provide advanced payments up  to  of 

twenty five percent (25%) of the grant award to the recipient to  initiate the project in a timely manner. The state 

agency administeting the grants may adopt additional requirements for  the recipient of the grant regarding the use 

of advanced payments to ensure the moneys are used properly. 

75840. (a) With respect to a project funded by the Wildlife Conservation Board, the department, the 

Strategic Growth Council, or by a state conservancy directly or through grants: 

( 1)  Any income accruing from  the intended recreational or open space preservation uses of a  project may 

be spent for recreational and open space purposes pursuant to the tem1s  and conditions specified by the grant 

agreement. 

(2) Any other income from  a project shall be refunded to the granting agency, except that the project 

agreement or grant may provide for the use of such funds  by the grantee for recreation development, community 

access, expansion of the project, including acquisition, or operation of the project, subject to a periodic audit and 

such other tenns and conditions that may be specified by the grantor agency. 

(b) Income from projects subject to  this section includes income derived from  the sale or lease ofreal 

property, sale of mitigation credits or other income received in exchange for non-recreational or non-open space 

preservation activity conducted on the land acquired and/or developed. 

(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of subdivision (a), if the use of the property acquired through grants 

pursuant to this division is changed to one other than pennitted under the category from which the funds were 

appropriated, or the property is  sold or otherwise disposed of, an amount equal to  the greater of the (I) amount of 

the grant, (2) the fair market value of the real property, or (3) the proceeds from  the portion thereof acquired, 

32 

developed, rehabilitated, or restored with  the grant shall be used by the grantee, subject to the approval of granting 

entity, for a purpose authorized in that category or shall  be reimbursed to  the granting agency which shall only use 

the returned funds  for a use authorized in the respective category of the bond. If the property sold or otherwise 

disposed of is less than the entire interest in the property originally acquired, developed, rehabilitated, or restored 

with the grant, an amount equal to the proceeds or the fair market value of the property interest sold or otherwise 

disposed of, whichever is greater, shall be used by the grantee, subject to the approval of the granting entity, for a 

purpose authorized in that category or shall be reimbursed to  the granting agency which shall only use the 

returned funds for a use authorized  in the respective category of the bond. 

75850. Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, funds allocated for expenditure by the Wildlife 

Conservation Board and pursuant to Divisions 22.8 and 23  are continuous ly approp1iated without regard to fiscal 

year. 

75860. In enacting Chapter 3 and Chapter 4  of th is division, it is the intent of the people that funds 

allocated to a conservancy may be used to  the fullest extent authorized by the statute governing the conservancy 

receiving the funds. 

75870. To the extent feasible in implementing this division, a state agency receiving funding under this 

division shall seek to achieve wildlife conservation objectives through projects on public lands or voluntary 

projects on p1ivate lands.  Funds may be used for payments for the creation of measurable habitat improvements or 

other improvements to the condition of endangered or threatened species, including through the development and 

implementation of habitat credit exchanges. 

75875 . To the extent feasible in implementing this division, a state agency receiving  funding under this 

division shall seek to achieve wi ldlife conservation objectives by reducing pennitting costs and expediting 

pennitting timelines for state funded habitat improvement projects. 

75880. Projects funded  pursuant to this division that are located within the boundary of an approved 

regional conservation investment strategy, pursuant to section  1850 of the Fish and Game Code, shall be 

consistent with the conservation objectives of the regional conservation investment strategy. 

75890. Projects funded pursuant to this division may use the services of the California Conservation 

Corps, certified community conservation corps, as defined in  Section 14507.5, or other nonprofit entities that 

provide job training and education opportunities for veterans, foster care recipients, fannworkers, or local youth 

in  conservation or restoration projects. 

75900. Prior to the expenditure of funds approp1iated pursuant to Section 75520, the Wildlife 

Conservation Board shall  develop and update a strategic plan to guide the expenditure of funds.  The expenditure 

plan shall recognize and address regional and statewide watershed protection and restoration priorities. The 

Wildlife Conservation Board's agendas and  minutes shall explain  how each proposed and funded project 

advances the implementation of its strategic plan. 

33 

75910. Funding pursuant to this division may be used for grants and loans to nonprofit organizations to 

repay  financing described  in Section 22064 of the Financial Code for projects that are consistent with the 

purposes of this  di vision. 

75911. Funds provided by this division shall  not be expended to support or pay for the cost of any 

environmental co mpli ance or mitigation measures required of any private or public party, except that funds  can be 

used  to pay for any mitigation measures required as a result of project components financed by this division. 

Funds provided  by this division may be used for environmental enhancements or o ther public benefits. 

CHAPTER 8. FISCAL PROV1SIONS 

75920.  Funds schedu led  in  Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this  division that are not designated  for competitive 

grant programs may also be used for the purposes of reimbursing the General Fund pursuant to the  arural 

Heritage Preservatio n Tax Credi t Act of 2000 (Division 28 (commencing with Section  37000)). 

75 930. The body awarding any contract for a public works project finan ced  in any part from  funds made 

available pursuant to  this division shall  comply with the prevailing wage requirements of Article 2 (commencing 

with  Section  l 770) of  Chapter  I  of Part  7 or Division 2 of the  Labor Code. 

75940. Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section  11340)  of Part  I of Di,·ision 3 of Title 2 of the 

Government Code does not apply to the development and adoption of program guidelines and selection criteria 

adopted pursuant to this division. 

75950.  Funds provided purs uant to this chapter. and any appropriation or transfer of those funds, shall not 

be deemed to be a transfer of funds for the purposes of Chapter 9 (commencing  with  Section 2780) of Division 3 

of the  Fish and Game Code. 

75960. Bonds  in  the total amount of seven billion  nine hundred ni nety million dollars  (7,990,000,000) not 

includi ng the amount of any refunding bonds  issued in accordance with Section 76040, or so much thereof as is 

necessary, may be issued and sold  to be used for carrying  out the  purposes set forth  in this division and to be used 

to  reimburse the General Obligation Bond  Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to  Section  16724.5 of the 

Government Code. The bond proceeds sha ll be deposited  in  the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, 

Natural Resources Protectio n and Park Improvement Fund of 201 8 created by Section  75305. The bonds  shall , 

when sold,  be and constitute a valid and binding obligation of the State of Cali fomia , and the fu ll  faith and credit 

of the  State of Californi a is hereby pledged  for the punctual payment of both principal of and  interest on the bonds 

as  they become due and  payable. 

75970. T he bonds authorized by this division shall be prepared, executed, issued, sold.  paid, and 

redeemed as provided in  the State General Obligation Bond Law. Chapter 4 (commencing with Section  16720) of 

Part 3 of Division 4  of Title 2 of the Government Code, and all provisions of that law shall apply to the bonds and 

34 

to thi s division and are hereby incorporated in  this divis ion by this reference as  though fully set forth in  th is 

d ivision. 

75980. (a) Solely for the purpose of authotizing the  issuance and sale, pursuant to the State General 

Obligation Bond  Law, of the bonds authorized by  th is di vision, the Safe D1i nking Water, Water Quality and 

Supply,  Natural Resources Pro tection and Park Improvement Fund of 201 8  Finance Comm ittee is  hereby created. 

For purposes o f this divis ion, the Safe Drinking Water, W ater Quality and S upply, Natural Resources Protection 

and Park Improvement Fund of 2018  Finance Co mmittee is ··the committee·· as that term  is  used by  the State 

Genera l Obl igation  Bond  Law. The committee s hall cons ist o f the Controller, the  Directo r of Finance, and  the 

Treasurer, or their des ignated representatives. T he T reasurer shall  serve as chairperso n of the committee. A 

maj o1ity o f the committee may act for the committee. 

(b) For purposes of this chapter and the State General Obligation Bond Law, the secretary is  designated as 

"the board." 

75990. T he committee shall determine whether or not it is  necessary or des irable  to  issue  bonds 

authorized pursuant to  this divis ion  in o rder to  carry out the actions specified  in  this d ivis ion and,  ifso, the 

amount of bonds to be issued and sold.  Successive issues o f bonds may be authorized and sold  to carry  out those 

actions progressi\ ely, and  it is  not necessary that all  of the bonds authori zed to be issued be sold at any one time. 

76000. T here shall  be collected annually in  the same manner and at the same time as other state revenue is 

collected. 

in  addition  to the ordinary revenues  ofrhe state, a sum  in an amo unt required to  pay the  principal o f, 

and interest on . the bonds maturing each year, and it is  the duty of a ll  officers charged by  law with any duty in 

regard to the collection of the re venue  to  do so and  perform  each and every act that is necessary to co llect that 

additional s um. 

76010. Notwithstanding Section  13340 o f the Government Code, there is  hereby appropr iated from  the 

General Fund. for purposes of this di vision, an amount that will  equal the total of the following: 

(a) T he sum annually necessary to pay the ptincipal of, and  interest on, bonds  issued and so ld  purs uant to 

this di vis ion, as the principal and  interest become clue and payable. 

(b) The sum  which  is necessary to carry  out the  provis ions of Section 76020, approp1i ated without regard 

to  fi scal years. 

76020. For the purposes of carrying out this d ivis ion, the Director of Finance ma y authotize the 

w ithd rawal from  the  General  Fund of an amount or amounts not to exceed the am ount of the unsold bonds  that 

have  been authorized  to be sold for the purpose of carrying  out this di visio n. An y amounts w ithdrawn shall  be 

deposited  in  the fund.  Any money made available under this section shall be rerurnecl  to the General Fund, plus 

the  interest that the amounts  would have earned in  the  Pooled Money Investment  Accoun t, from money received 

from  the sale o f bonds that would otherwise  be deposited in that fund. 

35 

76030. All  money derived from premium and  accrued interest on bonds sold shall  be reserved and shall 

be available  for transfer to  the General Fund as a credit to expenditures  for bond interest. 

76040. Any bonds issued or sold  pursuant to  this division m ay be refunded by the issuance of refunding 

bonds  in accordance with  Article 6 (commencing with Section  16780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3  o f Division 4 of Title 

2 of the Government Code. Approval by the electors of the state for the issuance of the bonds shall  include 

approval of the issuance of any bonds issued to  refund any bonds 01iginall y issued or an y previously issued 

refunding bonds. 

76050. The people  of California  hereby find  and declare that inasmuch as  the proceeds from  the  sale of 

bonds authorized by this divis ion are not "proceeds of taxes " as  that term is  used in Article X 11 1 B of the 

Cal ifornia Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds  is not subject to  the limitation  imposed by that article. 

SECTION 2 . This Act is an exercise of the public power of the People of the  State of  Cali fomia for the 

protection of their health, sa fety, and wel fare and shall  be liberally construed to  effectuate those purposes. 

SECTION 3. If this Act is approved by the voters, but superseded by any other conflicting ballot measure 

approved by  more voters  at the same election, and the conflicting ballot measure is later held invalid, it is the 

intent of the  voters that this Act shall be given the full force of law.  If any rival or conflicting measure regulating 

any matter addressed by this Act receives the higher affinnative vote, then all non-conflicting patts of this Act 

shall become operative. 

SECTION 4.  If any provision of this Act or the application thereof is held invalid, that invalidity shall  not 

affect other provisions or applications of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provisions or 

applications, and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable. 

36 

