1 7 - 0 0 2 8 


RECEIVED 

SEP  O5 2017

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S  OFFICE

Ms. Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office ofthe Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, California 95814 

August 30, 2017 

Re:  Request for title and summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

Pursuant to Article II,  Section 10( d) ofthe California Constitution, this letter requests that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purpose and points of the 
enclosed ballot initiative:  "California Freedom from Slavery Act."  Also enclosed are the 
required signed statements per California Elections Code, and a check in the amount of $2,000. 

Please direct all inquiries and correspondence regarding this proposed initiative to the 
undersigned. 

Sincerely, 

Lee Olson 
Chairman 
Committee to End Slavery 
16458 Bolsa Chica Street, #165 
Huntington Beach, CA  92649 

Enclosures:  Initiative language, Certifications and check 

SECTION 1.  Title.  This measure shall be known and may be cited as the "California Freedom 
from Slavery Act." 

SECTION 2.  Findings and Declarations 

A.  The Committee to End Slavery makes the following findings: 

(1) 	 It is a fact that one either owns property or one is property. 

(2) 	 The owner of property has the sole right to possession of that property, to decide how 

that property is used and to trade or dispose of that property in the manner of his 
choosing. 

(3)  California residents do not possess the rights of property ownership over anything. 
Therefore, because they do not possess ownership over anything they are property. 
This means they are owned by the real property owner and are, therefore, the slaves 
ofthe property owner. 

(4)  California State, County and Local governments own all property of California 

residents.  Therefore, California residents are slaves of the various levels of 
government. 

(5)  California residents do not even own their most fundamental, basic property, their 

bodies given to them by their Creator so they can function here on earth.  You would 
think they should at least own that property.  However, the government has usurped 
that ownership by telling the residents, at gun point, what they may or not 1) put in 
their bodies, 2) do with their bodies, 3) do by mutual consent with other residents, 4) 
do to provide services to others, ad infinitum. 

(6)  California residents do not own the house they mistakenly think they purchased. 
They are merely tenants of the house.  The deed recorded in the County Recorder 
office is not evidence of ownership, it's simply a rental agreement giving the tenant 
the first right of refusal to pay the rent (property tax) levied on the property. If the 
resident tenant does not pay the rent, then the government will kick the tenant out of 
the property and auction offthe rental agreement to another tenant.  If the government 
didn't own the property, it wouldn't be able to kick the non-rent paying tenant out. 

(7)  The power to tax is the power to destroy.  That is, the power to tax any one by any 

government involves the power to destroy and this power of government by taxation 
to destroy can defeat and render useless the power of individuals to create and 
preserve what they have created. 

(8)  There should be a time in the life of a slave when enough is enough and the slave 

should be freed. 

Section 3.  Purpose and Intent. 

A. 	 To free California residents from financial enslavement by the various levels of State, 

County and Local government upon their becoming senior citizens. 

B.  This is the first step in freeing all California residents from financial enslavement by 

the various levels of State, County and Local governments; one small step for 
man, one giant leap for mankind. 

Section 4.  The California Freedom from Slavery Act.  Section 33 is added to Article I of the 
California Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 33. 

(a) This Act shall be known as the "California Freedom from Slavery Act." 

(b) Notwithstanding any provision of the Constitution to the contrary, every 
resident of the State of California shall be exempt from all forms of State, 
County or Local income, real estate property and personal property taxes or 
fees beginning the year of the 55th anniversary of the birth ofthe resident and 
continuing every year of residency thereafter until, and including, the day of 
the resident's death and shall be exempt from any form of estate tax on the 
resident's estate. 

SECTION 5.  Proponent Standing. Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the State, its 
government agencies, or any of its officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this measure 
following its approval by the voters, any other government employee, any proponent, or, in their 
absence, any citizen of this state shall have the authority to intervene in any court action 
challenging the constitutionality of this measure for the purpose of defending its 
constitutionality, whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, or on discretionary review by 
the Supreme Court of California or the Supreme Court of the United States. The fees and costs of 
defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated to the Attorney General, which shall 
be satisfied promptly. 

