By Hand Delivery 

September 8, 2017 

To:  The Office of the Attorney General 
Attn: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

1 7  - 0  0  1  4  Arndt#  / 
RECEIVED 

SEP  t 3 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE

Re: 

Submission of Amendment to the Fair Pricing for Dialysis Act (No.  17-0014) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On August 9, 2017 the proponents of a proposed statewide initiative titled "Fair Pricing 

for Dialysis Act" (the "Initiative") submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary pursuant to Article II,  Section 10( d) of the California Constitution. 
Pursuant to Elections Code §9002(b), the proponents hereby submit timely amendments to the 
text of the Initiative.  As the proponents of the Initiative, we approve the submission of the 
amended text to the Initiative and we declare that the amendments are reasonably germane to the 
theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative.  We request that the Attorney General prepare a 
circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries and correspondence regarding this proposed 

initiative to: 

BJ Chisholm 
Altshuler Berzon LLP 
177 Post Street, Suite 300 
San Francisco, CA 94108 
Phone: 415-421-7151 
Email: bchisholm@altber.com 

Sincerely, 

'b- ~ 
iJ;iellfacePv/ 

i  -

..·

·-·· 

r 

Enclosure: Amended initiative language 

17-0014  Arndt.#  1 

This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with the provisions of 

Article II, Section 8, of the California Constitution. 

This initiative measure amends and adds sections to the Health and Safety Code; 

therefore, existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed in strikeout type and new 
provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new. 

SEC.  1.  Name 

This act shall be known as the ''Fair Pricing for Dialysis Act." 

SEC. 2.  Findings and Purposes 

This act, adopted by the people of the State of California, makes the following Findings 

and has the following Purposes: 

A. 

The People make the following findings: 

(1)  Kidney dialysis is a process where blood is cleaned of waste and excess water, 

usually through a machine outside the patient's body, and then returned to the patient. If 
someone who needs dialysis cannot obtain or afford high quality care, toxins build up in the 
body, leading to death. 

(2)  In California, at least 66,000 Californians undergo dialysis treatment. 

(3)  Just two multinational, for-profit corporations operate or manage nearly three­
quarters of dialysis clinics in California and treat almost 70 percent of dialysis patients in 
California.  These two multinational corporations annually earn billions of dollars from their 
dialysis operations, including almost $400 million each year in California alone. 

(4)  Because federal law mandates that private health insurance companies offer and pay 
for dialysis, private insurance companies have little ability to bargain with the two multinational 
dialysis corporations on behalf of their customers. 

(5)  Thus, for-profit dialysis corporations charge patients with private health insurance 
four times as much as they charge Medicare for the very same dialysis treatment, resulting in 
vast profits. 

(6)  In a market dominated by just two multinational corporations, California must ensure 

that dialysis is fairly priced and affordable. 

(7)  Other states have taken steps to protect these very vulnerable patients from these two 

multinational corporations. 

1 

(8)  Efforts to enact protections for kidney dialysis patients in California have been 

stymied in Sacramento by the dialysis corporations, which spent over $600,000 in just the first 
six months of 2017 to influence the California Legislature. 

B. 

Purposes: 

(1)  It is the purpose of this Act to ensure that outpatient kidney dialysis clinics provide 

quality and affordable patient care to people suffering from end stage renal disease. 

(2)  This Act is intended to be budget neutral for the State to implement and administer. 

SEC.  3.  Section 1226.7 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1226. 7.  (a)  Reasonable limits on charges for patient care by chronic dialysis clinics; rebates of 
amounts charged in excess offair treatment payment amount. 

(1)  For purposes ofthis section,  the  "fair treatment payment amount" shall be an amount equal 
to 115 percent ofthe sum ofall direct patient care services costs and all health care quality 
improvement costs incurred by a governing entity and its chronic dialysis clinics. 

(2)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2019,  a governing entity or its chronic 
dialysis clinics shall annually issue rebates to payers as follows: 

(A)  The governing entity shall calculate the  "unfair excess charged amount," which shall be the 
amount,  ifany,  by which treatment revenue from treatments provided by all ofthe governing 
entity's chronic dialysis clinics exceeds the fair treatment payment amount. 

(B)  The governing entity or its chronic dialysis clinics shall,  on a pro rata basis based on the 
amounts paid and reasonably estimated to be paid,  as those amounts are included in treatment 
revenue,  issue rebates to payers (other than Medicare or other federal,  state,  county,  city,  or 
local government payers) in amounts that total the unfair excess charged amount. 

(C)  The governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic shall issue any rebates required by this 
section no less than 90 days and no more than 210 days after the end ofits fiscal year to which 
the rebate relates. 

(D)  Where,  in any fiscal year,  the rebate the governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic must 
issue to a single payer is less than twenty dollars ($20),  the governing entity or chronic dialysis 
clinic shall not issue that rebate,  and shall provide to other payers in accordance with 
subparagraph (B)  the total amount ofrebates not issued pursuant to this subparagraph. 

(E)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2020,  any rebate issued to a payer shall 
be issued together with interest thereon at the rate ofinterest specified in subdivision (b)  of 
Section 3289 ofthe Civil Code,  which shall accrue.from the date ofpayment by the payer. 

(3)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2019,  a governing entity shall maintain 
and provide to the department,  on a form and schedule prescribed by the department,  a report of 
all rebates issued under paragraph (2),  including a description ofeach instance during the 

2 

period covered by the submission when the rebate required under paragraph (2)  was not timely 
issued in full,  and the reasons and circumstances therefor.  The chiefexecutive officer or 
principal officer ofthe governing entity shall certify under penalty ofperjury that he or she is 
satisfied,  after review,  that all information submitted to the department under this paragraph is 
accurate and complete. 

(4)  In  the event a governing entity or its chronic dialysis clinic is required to  issue a rebate 
under this section,  no later than 210 days after the end ofits fiscal year the governing entity 
shall pay a penalty to the department in an amount equal to five percent ofthe unfair excess 
charged amount, provided that the penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars 
($100,000).  Penalties collected pursuant to this paragraph shall be used by the department to 
implement and enforce laws governing chronic dialysis clinics. 
(5)  Ifa chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity disputes a determination by the department to 
assess a penalty pursuant to this subdivision or subdivision (b),  or the amount ofan 
administrative penalty,  the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity may,  within 10 working 
days,  request a hearing pursuant to Section 131071. A chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity 
shall pay all administrative penalties when all appeals have been exhausted and the 
department's position has been upheld. 
(6)  Ifa governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic proves in any court action that application of 
this section to the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity will,  in any particular fiscal year, 
violate due process or effect a taking ofprivate property requiring just compensation under the 
Constitution ofthis State or the Constitution ofthe  United States,  the provision at issue shall 
apply to the governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic,  except that as to the fiscal year in 
question the number  "115" whenever it appears in the provision at issue shall be replaced by the 
lowest possible whole number such that application ofthe provision to the governing entity or 
chronic dialysis clinic will not violate due process or effect a taking ofprivate property requiring 
just compensation.  In any civil action,  the burden shall be on the governing entity or chronic 
dialysis clinic to propose a replacement number and to prove that replacing "115" with any 
whole number lower than the proposed replacement number would, for the fiscal year in 
question,  violate due process or effect a taking ofprivate property requiring just compensation. 

(b)  Compliance reporting by chronic dialysis clinics. 

(1)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2019,  a governing entity shall maintain 
and submit to the department a report concerning the following information for all ofthe chronic 
dialysis clinics the governing entity owns or operates in California-

(A)  the number oftreatments performed; 

(B)  direct patient care services costs; 

(C)  health care quality improvement costs; 

(D)  treatment revenue,  including the difference between amounts billed but not yet paid and 
estimated realizable revenue; 

3 

(E)  the fair treatment payment amount; 

(F)  the unfair excess charged amount; 

(G)  the amount,  ifany,  ofeach payer's rebate, provided that any individual patient shall be 
identified using only a unique identifier that does not reveal the patient's name or identity; and 

(H)  a list ofpayers to whom no rebate was issued pursuant to subparagraph (D)  ofparagraph 
(2)  ofsubdivision (a)  and the amount not issued, provided that any individual patient shall be 
identified using only a unique identifier that does not reveal the patient's name or identity. 

(2)  The  information required to be maintained and the report required to  be submitted by this 
subdivision shall each be independently audited by a certified public accountant in accordance 
with the standards ofthe Accounting Standards Board ofthe American Institute ofCertified 
Public Accountants,  and shall include the opinion ofthat certified public accountant as to 
whether the information contained in the report fully and accurately describes,  in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles in the  United States,  the information required to 
be reported under paragraph (1). 

(3)  The governing entity shall annually submit the report required by this subdivision to the 
department on a schedule,  in a format,  and on a form prescribed by the department, provided 
that the governing entity shall submit the information no later than 210 days after the end ofits 
fiscal year.  The  chiefexecutive officer or other principal officer ofthe governing entity shall 
certify under penalty ofperjury that he or she is satisfied,  after review,  that the report submitted 
to the department under paragraph (1)  is accurate and complete. 

(4)  In the event the department determines that a chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity 
failed to  maintain the information or timely submit a report required under paragraph (1)  ofthis 
subdivision or paragraph (3)  ofsubdivision (a),  or that the amounts or percentages reported by 
the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity under paragraph (1)  ofthis subdivision were 
inaccurate or incomplete,  or that any failure  by a chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity to 
timely issue in full a rebate required by subdivision (a)  was not substantially justified,  the 
department shall assess a penalty against the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity not to 
exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).  The  department shall determine the amount of 
the penalty based on the severity ofthe violation,  the materiality ofthe inaccuracy or omitted 
information,  and the strength ofthe explanation,  ifany, for the violation.  Penalties collected 
pursuant to this paragraph shall be used by the department to  implement and enforce laws 
governing chronic dialysis clinics. 

(c)  Definitions. 

For purposes ofthis section: 

(1)  "Direct patient care services costs" means those costs directly associated with operating a 
chronic dialysis clinic in California andproviding care to patients in California.  Direct patient 
care services costs shall include,  regardless ofthe location where each patient undergoes 
dialysis,  only (i)  salaries,  wages,  and benefits ofnon-managerial chronic dialysis clinic staff, 

4 

including all clinic personnel who furnish direct care to dialysis patients, regardless ofwhether 
the salaries,  wages,  or benefits are paid directly by the chronic dialysis clinic or indirectly 
through an arrangement with an affiliated or unaffiliated third party,  including but not limited to 
a governing entity,  an independent staffing agency,  a physician group,  or a joint venture between 
a chronic dialysis clinic and a physician group;  (ii)  stafftraining and development;  (iii) 
pharmaceuticals and medical supplies;  (iv) facility costs,  including rent,  maintenance,  and 
utilities;  (v)  laboratory testing;  and (vi)  depreciation and amortization ofbuildings,  leasehold 
improvements, patient supplies,  equipment,  and information systems.  For purposes ofthis 
section,  "non-managerial chronic dialysis clinic staff" includes all clinic personnel who furnish 
direct care to dialysis patients,  including nurses,  technicians and trainees,  social workers, 
registered dietitians,  and non-managerial administrative staff, but excludes managerial staff 
such as facility administrators.  Categories ofdirect patient care services costs may be further 
prescribed by the department through regulation. 

(2)  "Governing entity" means a person, firm,  association, partnership,  corporation,  or other 
entity that owns or operates a chronic dialysis clinic for which a license has been issued,  without 
respect to whether the person or entity itself directly holds that license. 

(3)  "Health care quality improvement costs" means costs,  other than direct patient care services 
costs,  that are related to  the provision ofcare to chronic dialysis patients and that are actually 
expendedfor goods or services in California that are required to  maintain,  access or exchange 
electronic health information,  to support health information technologies,  to train non­
managerial chronic dialysis clinic staffengaged in direct patient care,  and to provide patient­
centered education and counseling.  Additional costs may be  identified by the department through 
regulation, provided that such costs are actually spent on services offered at the chronic dialysis 
clinic to chronic dialysis patients and are spent on activities that are designed to  improve health 
quality and to  increase the likelihood ofdesired health outcomes in ways that are capable of 
being objectively measured and ofproducing verifiable results and achievements. 

(4)  "Payer" means the person or persons who paid or are financially responsible for payments 
for a treatment provided to  a particular patient,  and may include the patient or other individuals, 
primary insurers,  secondary .insurers,  and other entities,  including Medicare and any other 
federal,  state,  county,  city,  or other local government payer. 

(5)  "Treatment" means each instance when the chronic dialysis clinic provides services to a 
patient. 

(6)  "Treatment revenue" for a particular fiscal year means all amounts actually received and 
estimated realizable revenue for treatments provided in that fiscal year.  Estimated realizable 
revenue shall be calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,  and 
shall be a reasonable estimate based on (i)  contractual terms for patients covered under 
commercial healthcare plans with which the governing entity or clinics have formal agreements; 
(ii)  revenue from Medicare,  Medicaid,  and Medi-Cal based on rates set by statute or regulation, 
and estimates ofamounts ultimately collectible from government payers,  commercial healthcare 
plan secondary coverage, patients,  and other payers; and (iii)  historical collection experience. 

5 

SEC. 4.  Section 1226.8 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1226.8 (a)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall not discriminate with respect to offering or providing 
care,  and shall not refuse to offer or provide care,  to patients on the basis ofthe payer for 
treatment provided to a patient,  including but not limited to on the basis that the payer is a 
patient, private payer or insurer,  Medi-Cal, Medicaid,  or Medicare. 

(b)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall not terminate,  abridge,  modify,  or fail to perform under any 
agreement to provide services to patients covered by Medi-Cal,  Medicaid,  or Medicare on the 
basis ofrequirements imposed by this chapter. 

SEC.  5.  Section 1266.3 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1266. 3.  It is the  intent ofthe People that California taxpayers not be financially responsible for 
implementation and enforcement  ofthe Fair Pricing for Dialysis Act.  In order to effectuate that 
intent,  when calculating,  assessing,  and collecting fees imposed on chronic dialysis clinics 
pursuant to Section 1266,  the department shall take into account all costs associated with 
implementing and enforcing Sections 1226. 7 and 1226. 8. 

SEC. 6.  Nothing in this act is intended to affect health facilities licensed pursuant to subdivision 
(a), (b ), or  (f)  of Section 125 0 of the Health and Safety Code. 

SEC. 7.  The State Department of Public Health shall issue regulations necessary to implement 
this act no later than 180 days following its effective date. 

SEC. 8.  Pursuant to subdivision ( c) of Section 10 of Article II of the California Constitution, this 
Act may be amended either by a subsequent measure submitted to a vote of the people at a 
statewide election; or by a statute validly passed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor, 
but only to further the purposes of the Act. 

SEC. 9.  The provisions of this act are severable. If any provision of this act or its application is 
held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given 
effect without the invalid provision or application. 

6 

