Ms. Ashley Johansson 

Initiative Coordinator 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, California 95814-2919 

May 19, 2017 

Re:  Request for title and summary 

17-0005 


RECEIVED 

MAY  1 9 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 
Pursuant to Article II, Section lO(d) of the California Constitution, this letter 
respectfully requests that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and 
summary of the enclosed  ballot initiative: "California's Future: A Path To 
Independence". The  proponents of this initiative are Stephen Gonzales,  David 
Marin, Cindy Sheehan, Shankar Singam, Timothy Vollmer. 

Also enclosed are the required signed statements pursuant to California Elections 
Code 9001 and 9608, and a check in  the amount of $2000. Please direct all 
inquirie ~and  correspondence regarding this proposed initiative to: 

Steplien G 
President 
California Freedom Coalition  [CFC] 
1002 Riverside Drive 
San Jose,  CA 95125 
stevegol"!_1@.g_mail.com 
408-813-7486 

17-0005 


SECTION 1. Findings and Declarations 

The People of the State of California find and declare all of the following: 

1. California, while currently a state, is also a nation in its own right, and it is in our best 
interest as Californians to act accordingly. 

Part 1: ON CALIFORNIA AS A NATION IN ITS OWN RIGHT 

2. California has a history as a recognizable polity going back farther than the American 
Revolution. 

3. California consistently ranks as one of the world's ten largest economies, and is a 
global leader in high technology, pharmaceuticals, entertainment, agriculture, 
sustainable energy, higher education, and many other fields. 

4. Californians have a shared set of values, distinct both from those of Americans and 
other peoples, that contribute to our success: 

(a) a focus on the future: not merely what was or what is, but what is possible 

(b) respect for scientific knowledge, innovation, imagination, and higher learning 

(c) a belief that people of all backgrounds are welcome and can live and work 
together in harmony, and enjoy equal rights 

(d) a deep commitment to democracy in the strongest sense of the word 

5. California is an influential and well-known actor on the world stage, particularly in 
our fight against climate change. 

6.  California's borders are not arbitrary lines on a map but reflect real physical 
geography. 

7.  California is tightly integrated economically and by water, electrical, and 
transportation infrastructure. 

Part 2: ON CALIFORNIA'S DIFFICULTIES WITH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 

8. California currently faces an openly hostile presidential administration which has 
already attacked California in the following ways: 

(a) attempting to de-legitimize California's voting system 

Page  1 

(b) arbitrarily enforcing a broken immigration system that consigns more than 
two million Californians permanently to the shadows, and attempting to withhold 
billions of dollars from California's state and local governments in an attempt to 
strongarm them into enforcing this broken system 

(c) threatening California's ability to work with the rest of the world in 
confronting the real and present danger of climate change 

(d) creating uncertainty around free trade, particularly with California's three 
largest trading partners: Mexico, Canada, and China 

(e) targeting California in a host of other policy areas, including health care, tax 
policy, marijuana, and offshore drilling. 

9. However, these are merely symptoms of California's much longer-standing difficulties 
within the federal system, which transcend both a single president and a single party: 

(a) federal ownership of more than 45% of California's territory, going back as far 
as statehood in 1850, and management of this land in ways that are often neither 
ecologically sound, economically valuable, nor respectful of local conditions. 

(b) economically disadvantaging California by extracting a significantly larger 
share of federal taxes from California than it returns in spending in every year 
since 1986, and by allocating money which California needs for peacetime 
priorities to fund a needlessly expensive military, which has persisted through 
the start of the Cold War in 1947 to the present day. (Discussed in detail in Part 3, 
below) 

(c) chronic underrepresentation of Californians in the United States' system of 
government, going back at least since California became the most populous state 
in 1962. (Discussed in detail in Part 4, below) 

Part 3: ON FEDERAL TAXATION AND SPENDING 

10. For the past twenty years, California taxpayers have shouldered a significantly 
greater portion of federal taxation than is reflected in the percentage of federal spending 
Californians receive, generally between 80 and 90 cents on the dollar. 

11. In essence, there are no federal dollars spent in California, only our own tax dollars, 
minus approximately 45 billion dollars annually to subsidize other states. 

12. This picture is complicated somewhat by deficit spending at the federal level; 
however, debt incurred by the United States is not a gift to Californians but expected to 
be later repaid - presumably at a disproportionate rate. 

13. Nor is the State of California's own public debt so poorly valued that California needs 
the United States' larger economic weight to weather economic recessions and 

Page 2 

emergencies. In fact, California's economy is highly diversified and growing faster than 
the United States' economy as a whole. 

14. Furthermore, the United States spends nearly 600 billion dollars a year on its 
military, more than the next seven countries combined. California taxpayers' share of 
this is more than 70 billion dollars annually. 

15. In contrast, Canada, a country similar to California in population size and economic 
development, manages to defend a much larger land area and meet its international 
commitments while spending about 15 billion dollars a year. In essence, excessive 
military spending alone costs California taxpayers more than 55 billion dollars a year. 

16. California is clearly willing and able to administer its own tax dollars. When federal 
and state spending is taken as a whole, nearly half of that is administered by state and 
local governments, with another sixth, mostly Social Security, disbursed according to a 
predefined formula. 

17. There is nothing that would, in principle, keep Californians from better 
administering that sixth or the remaining third ourselves. For example, the federal 
government spends significant amounts of money on science and higher education, but 
California leads the world in those areas! 

18. In sum, California's fiscal relationship with the United States costs Californians 
about one hundred billion dollars annually, that is, nearly the size of our state 
government's General Fund, while offering us nothing that we could not more readily do 
for ourselves. 

Part 4:  ON DEMOCRACY 

19. California has practiced direct democracy since the adoption of the initiative in 1911, 
and is in fact the world's largest direct democracy. 

20. While the initiative system presents its own challenges, there is no question that 
California practices democracy in the fullest sense of the word: where all adult citizens 
have the right to vote and have our vote counted, where all votes count equally, where 
the government must ultimately bow to the will of the people, and where fundamental 
reform to the system of government is not only possible but frequent. 

21. Californians have enjoyed significant success in changing California by engaging in 
good faith with California's system of government and electoral system. It is tempting to 
believe that to change the United States, we need simply to do more of the same on a 
larger scale. However, this line of thinking runs up against some hard truths about the 
American system of government. 

22. Californians are woefully underrepresented in the U.S. Senate. Though we comprise 
nearly one-eighth of the United States' population, we receive only one-fiftieth of the 
seats, that is, one-sixth the representation of the average American. 

Page 3 

23. The Electoral College, while giving Californians a more proportionate share of 
representation than in the Senate, in practice reduces Californians' influence over the 
United States' choice of president to nearly zero. In fact,  California's electoral votes have 
not been the deciding factor in a presidential race since 1916. 

24. Californians do receive nearly equal representation in the House of Representatives. 
However our power is diluted by other states in two ways: 

(a) partisan gerrymandering, which is practiced by the majority of states. As  a 
result, though one major party earned slightly more than one percent more votes 
for its House candidates in the November 2016 election, it received ten percent 
more seats! 

(b) use of the criminal justice system to permanently disenfranchise adult 
citizens, even after they have served their sentence. For example, in Florida, more 
than one-tenth of adult citizens are unable to vote. 

25. California engages in neither of these undemocratic practices. In essence, California 
participates in good faith in a system which other state governments game. 

26. These failings could be remedied by amending the United States Constitution, but 
again, this is a process where Californians have little say; California could provide only 
one of the 38 votes necessary to ratify such an amendment. 

27. Thus, in engaging with the American system of government, Californians should see 
it for what it was designed to be, not a democracy in the modern sense of the word, but a 
means of harvesting the fruits of republican governance while at the same time 
protecting entrenched power. As abolitionist Frederick Douglass noted in his own 
struggles with the United States, power concedes nothing without a demand. 

Part 5:  ON WAYS FORWARD 

28. If Californians wish to live in a democracy, we have three options: 

(a) fundamental reforms to the American system of governance, including equal 
representation and an affirmative right of all adult citizens to vote 

(b) significant autonomy within the United States for California, whereby 
decisions at the federal level have little impact on the lives of Californians 

(c) California becoming an independent country 

29. Paradoxically, the first of these options, while seemingly the most straightforward, is 
the one Californians can do least about, as it would require amending the United States 
Constitution. 

Page 4 

30. In contrast, California could legally gain significant autonomy through a series of 
ordinary acts of Congress. If tradition and political pressure were not enough to keep the 
United States from later revoking this autonomy, it could be kept in place with contracts 
and other legal mechanisms. And transfers of federal land are clearly irrevocable. 

31. The seemingly unthinkable, independence, could again be accomplished through 
either an act of Congress or a treaty. Even if it were not possible for Congress to 
voluntarily grant independence to a state, it is clear, under existing precedent, that 
Congress could grant independence to the bulk of California's territory, effectively 
reconstituting California as an independent country while allowing the United States to 
maintain the legal fiction of perpetual union. 

32. The path to both autonomy and full independence is largely the same; for California 
to take stock of the leverage it has over the United States, and to use this leverage to 
negotiate for ever greater autonomy, culminating in a final settlement redefining 
California's relationship with the United States. 

33. If at some point the United States does reform its system of government, 
Californians could choose at that time to abandon the pursuit of autonomy in favor of 
being equal participants in American democracy. Even if California had by then become 
independent, nothing would preclude it from seeking readmission as a state. 

34. Thus, as Californians, we have much to gain and little to lose by pursuing autonomy. 

SECTION 2. Statement of Purpose 

Therefore, the purpose of this measure is to put California on the path towards 
becoming a fully-functioning sovereign and autonomous nation, whether within 
continued association with the United States of America, or as an independent country. 

SECTION 3. Constitutional Amendments 

SECTION 3.1. Section 1 of Article III of the California Constitution is amended to read: 

Sec. 1. The State of California is an inseparable part of the United States of America, and 
the United States Constitution is the supreme law of the land. 

SECTION 3.2. Article XXXVI is added to the California Constitution as follows: 

ARTICLE XXXVI AUTONOMYAND INDEPENDENCE 

Page 5 

Sec. 1. It is the intent ofthe People ofthe State ofCalifornia that California become a 
fully-functioning sovereign and autonomous nation, whether within continued 
association with the United States ofAmerica or as an independent country, peacefully 
through negotiation with the federal government ofthe United States. 

2. The Governor shall lead these negotiations, both: 

(a) to continually gain greater autonomy from the federal governmentfor 
California's State and local governments, andfor its People. 

(b) to negotiate the terms ofa final settlement allowing California to become a 
fully-functioning sovereign and autonomous nation, not to take effect until 
adopted by the voters as a revision to this Constitution. 

3. The governor shall regularly coordinate with California's Congressional delegation 
regarding these negotiations. 

4.  Other details ofthese negotiations may be provided by statute. 

5.  The People ofthe State ofCalifornia call upon our state and federal elected officials: 

(a) to support California in negotiations with the federal government, and to 
maximize its leverage in these negotiations. 

(b) to help foster a sense ofcommon identity and shared interests among all 
Californians that transcends the political divisions ofthe United States. 

6. The People ofthe State ofCalifornia call upon our state elected officials: 

(a) to buffer Californians against chaos, dysfunction, and uncertainty at the 
federal level. 

(b) to pursue reforms to California's system ofgovernment which would 
reasonably allow California to operate as an independent country, to the extent 
possible under the United States Constitution. 

7.  Sections 5 and 6 ofthis Article are advisory in nature and are meant solely to be 
enforced by the voters, at their own discretion. 

Page 6 

SECTION 4. The Juan Bautista Alvarado Commission on Autonomy and Independence 

SECTION 4.1. Chapter 11.3, "The Juan Bautista Alvarado Commission on Autonomy and 
Independence" is added to Division 1 of Title 2  of the Government Code as follows: 

Article 1. Purpose 

8849.1.  There is in the state government the Juan Bautista Alvarado Commission on 
Autonomy and Independence, hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 
"commission." 

8849.2. The intent ofthe People ofCalifornia in creating the commission is to advise 
the Governor, the Attorney General, the legislature, and other elected officials as to 
how to help California become a.fully.functioning sovereign and autonomous nation, 
as described in Article XXXVI ofthe State Constitution. 

8849.3. The commission shall advise and review on a general basis, not participate 
directly in negotiations with the federal government, nor meet in closed session with 
the Governor or other relevant persons to discuss sensitive and timely details ofsuch 
negotiations. Ifsuch a body is necessary, it should be created by separate statute (see 
Section 4 ofArticle XXXVI ofthe State Constitution and subsection 8851.1 (JJ,  below). 

8849.4. The commission shall operate on a permanent and ongoing basis, to be 
disbanded or repurposed in conjunction with a constitutional revision altering 
California's relationship with the United States (as described in subsection 2(b) of 
Article XXXVI ofthe State Constitution), or at the will ofthe voters. 

Article 2. Membership 

8850.1.  The commission shall be organized and constituted, and its members chosen to 
serve terms ofthe same duration and end time, in the same manner as the Milton 
Marks Commission on California State Government Organization and Economy 
(hereafter referred to in this Chapter as the "Little Hoover Commission"), as described 
in Sections 8501-8508. 

8850.2. All initial appointments to the commission shall have been made within 90 
days ofthis Chapter taking effect. 

Article 3. Powers and Duties 

8851.1.  The commission shall study and issue recommendations on the following: 

(a) how the state ofCalifornia can buffer its residents against chaos, 
dysfunction, and uncertainty at the federal level 

Page 7 

(b) constitutional revisions and other structural reforms that would allow 
California's system ofgovernment to operate more like that ofan independent 
country, using similar democratic countries as models 

(c) how to address the real concerns ofCalifornia residents who feel ignored by 
or left out ofour current system ofgovernment 

(d) California's.fiscal relationship with the federal government, including 
federalfunds collectedfrom California taxpayers,federal expenditures in 
California, how those expenditures are administered, and how California could 
assume a greater role in their collection and administration 

(e) other areas where California enjoys significant leverage over the federal 
government, or could gain such leverage 

(f) statutory language and other details ofhow California might best conduct 
negotiations for autonomy and independence with the federal government 

(g) latent forms ofautonomy that California already has the legal authority to 
exercise but does not 

(h) legal strategies that would allow California to gain additional autonomy 
through the court system, and to defend autonomy already gained 

(i)forms ofautonomy that California could reasonably demandfrom the 
federal government, given its leverage 

(i) legal avenues that would allow California to make autonomy gained from 
the United States binding and durable, without requiring an amendment to the 
United States Constitution 

(j) legal avenues that would allow California to become an independent 
country, without requiring an amendment to the United States Constitution 

(k) how international law might help California achieve greater autonomy 
and/or full independence 

(l) comparing the status quo against severalfeasible scenarios wherein 
California achieves greater autonomy, including full independence 

8851.2. The commission shall publish one or more preliminary reports covering each 
ofthe topics in Section 8851.1  no later than one year after its.first meeting. 

8851.3. In carrying out its duties and responsibilities, the commission shall have the 
same powers granted to the Little Hoover Commission in Section 8541. 

Page 8 

8851.4. The commission, on its own motion, may,for the purpose ofmaking reports 
and recommendations on the topics described in Section 8851.1, examine in detail the 
use offederal funds administered by state or local government; funds, collected by 
state or local governments on behalf ofthe federal government, including (in 
aggregate) tax withholdings; and contracts and other binding agreements between 
state or local government and the federal government. 

8851.5. The Governor shall submit to the commission, at least once in each calendar 
year beginning with 2019, a report regarding the progress ofongoing negotiations 
with the federal government. The commission may then request the Governor provide 
additional details, which the Governor shall supply within 30 days. The commission 
shall publish this report, to which it may make its own amendments, within 90 days of 
receiving the initial report from the Governor. 

8851.6. The commission shall be adequately funded to perform its duties, and in no 
case shall the commission receive funding less than one one-thousandth ofone percent 
ofthe General Fund in any fiscal year. (As described in Section 8503 ofthe 
Government Code, referenced by Section 8508.1, above, the members ofthe 
commission shall serve without compensation and receive only reimbursement.) 

Article 4. Miscellaneous Provisions 

8852.1. References in this Chapter to code enabling the Little Hoover Commission 
(sections 8501-8542) refer to the code as ofJanuary 1, 2017. 

SECTION 4.2 Amendment 

The provisions of the legislation created by Section 4.1 may be amended by a two-thirds 
vote of the Legislature to further its purposes. 

SECTION 5. Severability 

If any provision of this measure, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid 
or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in 
full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure are severable. 

SECTION 6.  Proponent Standing 

Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the State, its government agencies, or any 
of its officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this measure following its approval 
by the voters, any other government employee, any proponent, or, in their absence, any 
citizen of this state shall have the authority to intervene in any court action challenging 
the constitutionality of this measure for the purpose of defending its constitutionality, 
whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, or on discretionary review by the 
Supreme Court of California or the Supreme Court of the United States. The fees and 

Page 9 

costs of defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated to the Attorney 
General, which shall be satisfied promptly. 

Page  10 


