17-0019 


RECEIVED 

AUG  18  2017

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Ms. Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, California 95814-2919 

August 17th, 201 7 

Re: Request for title and summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 10( d)  of the California Constitution, this letter respectfully 
requests that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the enclosed ballot 
initiative: "California Healthcare Roadblock Removal Act." Also enclosed are the required 
signed statements pursuant to California Elections Code sections 9001  and 9608, and a check in 
the amount of $2,000. 

Please direct all inquiries and correspondence regarding this proposed initiative to: 

Dale Fountain 
Chairperson/CEO 
Enact Universal Healthcare for CA, Inc. 
940 Stewart Drive #303 
Sunnyvale, CA 94085 
Phone: ( 408) 462-0452 
Email: dfountain@euhc4ca.org 

Sincerely, 

v~  ~~ 
/~   .-·---­

~~ 

Dale Fountain 

Enclosures: Initiative language; Certifications; check 

SECTION 1.  Title. This measure shall be known and may be cited as the "California Healthcare 
Roadblock Removal Act" 

1  7  - 0  0  1  9 

SECTION 2. Findings and Declarations 

A.  The People make the following findings: 

(1)  Most affluent nations provide a universal government health system for their entire 

population with lower costs and better outcomes than the United States. The US spends 
approximately $9,000 a year per person on healthcare, compared to Canada, which 
spends $5,000, and Italy, which spends around $3,000. 

(2)  The current California healthcare "system" is an inefficient patchwork system of private 
insurance, community/state funded programs, and federal programs, including Medicaid 
and Medicare. This system has high overhead, is expensive, and leaves 8.5% of 
Californians, or roughly 2. l  million people, without health coverage. 

(3)  The Affordable Care Act allows California to propose using federal funds in conjunction 

with other funds to create an efficient single-payer system to cover all Californians. 

(4)  Californians have a right to healthcare, both under Section I of Article I of the state 

Constitution ("enjoying and defending life") and as  a human right under Article 25  of the 
U.N. Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948). 

(5)  81 % of Californians support ensuring that every Californian has healthcare. 

(6)  58% of Californians support a single-payer system, even when confronted with all major 

counterarguments. 

(7)  56% of US physicians support a single-payer system. 

(8)  Currently, California's healthcare system is largely defined and funded by the federal 


government. 


(9)  However, the federal government has proven itself an unreliable partner. Congress has 

attempted to dismantle the current healthcare system without putting forth a workable 

replacement, and the President has stated his intent to  allow the current system to fail. 


1 


(10) 	 As it stands, the California Constitution permits our state government to administer 

federal funds dedicated to healthcare ( e.g. Medi-Cal). As California is a "donor" state, all 
federal funds spent in California come from California taxpayers. 

(11) 	 However, if the federal government were to reduce its spending on healthcare, and 

our state Legislature attempted to replace these funds through state taxes, raising the 
same revenues, for the same purposes, from the same taxpayers, it would quickly run 
afoul of arcane fiscal rules embedded in our state Constitution. 

(12) 	 The State Constitution permits California's state government to regulate private 

health insurance, which, under the Affordable Care Act, most Californians are required to 
purchase. However, if the state Legislature were to create a single-payer universal 
healthcare system (which 58% of Californians support), replacing insurance premiums 
with (lower) taxes, it would again run afoul of these fiscal rules. 

(13) 	

If Californians wish to have a stable, reliable universal healthcare system, not 

vulnerable to the whims of partisan politics at the federal level, we first need to amend 
our state Constitution's fiscal rules to make such a system possible. 

SECTION 3.  Purpose and Intent. 

A. 	 To establish a healthcare trust fund independent ofthe General Fund. 

B. 	 To direct, and place reasonable burden on, the Legislature to enact healthcare policy and 

funding mechanisms through normal legislative deliberation. 

SECTION 4.  The Healthy California Trust Fund. Section 24 is added to Article XVI of the 
Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 24. 

(a) 	 The Healthy California Trust Fund is hereby established in the State Treasury. 

(b) 	 The purpose  ofthe Healthy California Trust Fund is to fund,  promote,  support,  and 

improve healthcare and healthcare-related goods,  services,  outcomes,  and education. 
Funds in the Healthy California Trust Fund may not be disbursed or loaned for any other 
purpose. 

2 


(c) 	 The State ofCalifornia may transfer funds in its possession,  including federal funds,  into 

the Healthy California Trust Fund. 

(d)  Notwithstanding any other section ofthis Constitution,  investment income derived from 

the Healthy California Trust Fund,  and revenue sources dedicated to the Healthy 
California Trust Fund,  including any tax,  surtax,  or fee,  shall not be considered part of 
the General Fund,  nor shall they be counted in or affected by any appropriations limit, 
revenue limit,  or spending formula. 

(e) 	 The  Controller shall audit the Healthy California Trust Fund annually to  ensure that its 

funds are used and accountedfor in a manner consistent with this section. 

(!) 	 Rainy Day Reserves:  The  Legislature,  two-thirds ofthe membership ofeach house 

concurring,  may establish statutory rules reserving funds deposited into the Healthy 
California Trust Fund and/or delaying disbursements ofsaidfunds,  which,  once such 
rules become law,  may only be amended or repealed by another two-thirds vote ofthe 
Legislature,  or by the electors.  In no case shall the Healthy California Trust Fund hold 
unallocated reserves greater than 12. 5% ofdeposits over the previous two fiscal years. 

SECTION 5.  Section 8 is added to Article XIII A of the Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 8.  Section 3 ofthis article does not apply to the California Healthcare 
Roadblock Removal Act. 

SECTION 6.  Section 15 is added to Article XIII B of the Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 15.  ''Appropriations subject to limitation" ofeach entity ofgovernment shall 
not include appropriations ofrevenue from the Healthy California Trust Fund created by 
the California Healthcare Roadblock Removal Act.  No adjustment in the appropriations 
limit ofany entity ofgovernment shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of 
revenue being deposited in or appropriated from the Healthy California Trust Fund. 

SECTION 7. Liberal construction. The provisions of this act shall be liberally construed to 
effectuate its purposes of funding, promoting, supporting, and improving healthcare and 
healthcare-related goods, services, outcomes, and education. 

SECTION 8. No conflict with other laws. The provisions of this act are intended to be in 
addition to and not in conflict with any other initiative measure that may be adopted by the 

3 


people at the November 2018 election, and the provisions of this act shall be interpreted and 
construed so as to avoid conflicts with any such measure whenever possible. 

SECTION 9.  Severability. If any provision of this act, or part thereof, is for any reason held to be 
invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in full 
force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. 

SECTION 10. Proponent Standing. Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the State, its 
government agencies, or any of its officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this measure 
following its approval by the voters, any other government employee, any proponent, or, in their 
absence, any citizen of this state shall have the authority to intervene in any court action 
challenging the constitutionality of this measure for the purpose of defending its 
constitutionality, whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, or on discretionary review by 
the Supreme Court of California or the Supreme Court of the United States. The fees and costs of 
defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated to the Attorney General, which shall 
be satisfied promptly. 

4 


