January 19, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 	

Office of the Attorney General 
Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

1300 "I" Street 

Sacramento, CA 95814 


1  5  - 0  1  1  7  Arndt#  J 

RECEIVED 

JAN  19  2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE

RE: 	 Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure - the 

Election Data Security & Military Ballot Access Act, No.15-0117 


Dear Ms. Johansson: 

As you know, I am the proponent of the proposed statewide initiative, 

the "Election Data Security &  Military Ballot Access Act." I am enclosing the 

following documents: 


• 	 The amended text of the "Election Data Security &  Military Ballot 

Access Act." 

• 	 A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended text 
• 	 Signed authorization from myself as the proponent for submission of 
the amended text together with a request that the Attorney General's 
Office prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended 
text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this 


proposed initiative to me at the address listed below: 


Lance H.  Olson 

Olson, Hagel &  Fishburn LLP 

555 Capitol Mall, Suite 1425 

Sacramento, CA 95814 


Very truly yours, 

OLSON HAGEL &  FISHBURN LLP 

0J( GL 

~ANCE I-1.  OLSON 

LHO:LEK 
J:\POL\40083-5\AG Amendment Cover Letter 1.19.16 (Version !).doc 

www.olsonhagel.com ~~ 

1 5  - o 1  1 r  Amdl#  I 

SECTION 1. TITLE. 

This  act  shall  be  known  and  may be  cited  as  the  "Election  Data  Security  &  Military  Ballot 
Access Act." 

SECTION 2. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS. 

The  people  of the  State  of California  hereby  make  the  following  findings  and  declare  their 
purpose in enacting this act as follows: 

(1) The current vote by mail system can be improved.  It is  subject to potential fraud  and abuse, 
and it often prevents some voters from exercising their fundamental right to vote, particularly our 
military serving  overseas.  Without  sufficient time  to  return their b&].lots  by mail,  thousands  of 
military ballots  are  not returned  and many of those that  are returned  are  not  counted.  Further, 
military voters are often asked to waive their constitutional right to a secret ballot in order to vote 
in a timely fashion via fax. In addition, the current signature verification process for vote by mail 
ballots results in many potentially valid ballots not getting counted because the voter's signature 
changes over time, with many Californians never knowing that their vote did not count. 
(2) Voter turnout is  dropping and fewer voters  are making it to the polls on Election Day.  Vote 
by mail has helped but does not rely on current security methods and encryption technology, and 
for California to reverse the trends of the last century we must be allowed to  explore the use of 
today's technology to increase turnout. 
(3)  In  today's  modem  world,  we  should  never  need  to  compromise  our  military  men  and 
women's right to  cast a secret ballot to have that vote count.  Once certified to be as  secure as,  or 
more  secure  than,  existing  voting  systems,  new  ways  of allowing voters  to  cast  a ballot more 
conveniently will improve voter turnout. 
(4)  To  ensure  fair  elections  where  every valid  vote  counts,  we  need  to  study  existing  voting 
systems  and  evaluate modern methods  for  improving and enhancing security to  those systems. 
Empowering the state and local governments to utilize tools thatare at least as  secure as  existing 
voting systems, we can provide a more secure and accurate method of counting votes. 
(5) This measure establishes a nonpartisan commis~ion of our foremost experts in cyber security 
and  encryption  technology  to  work  with  elections  administration  officials  to  certify  a  voting 
system with at least as much security as  current vote by mail  system.  The commission will not 
require  permanent  funding,  but  will  be  subsumed  by  the  Secretary  of  State's  office  upon 
completion of its duties. This serves the public interest for a more secure and accessible elections 
system without creating additional bureaucracy in the long run. 
(6)  That voting system will  allow California's military serving overseas to  vote instantaneously 
and  securely without  sacrificing their right to  a  secret ballot,  and  eventually will  extend  to  all 
California voters.  Millions of Californians have the opportunity to  vote electronically:  44 of the 
state's  58  counties  use  electronic  voting  at  polling  locations  and  transmit  the  results  of those 
elections electronically. 
(7) That voting system will establish built-in accountability to verify a voter's identity and ensure 
that the correct person is  casting their vote,  and  maintain a paper trail  for  audit as  needed and 
required by Federal law.  It will establish more oversight than any voting system California has 
ever put in place. Improved voter verification wUI allow more valid votes to be counted. 

1 


(8)  That  voting  system  will  further  remove  existing  hurdles  to  voting  and  will  particularly 
enfranchise parents and workers without flexible  schedules  on Election Day,  ensuring everyone 
has an equal chance to participate in our elections. 
(9)  This  measure  will  ultimately save  taxpayers  money by reducing the  costs  of administering 
and conducting elections. 

SECTION 3.  PURPOSE AND INTENT. 

The people of the State of California declare that this act is intended to do the following: 

(a)  To  strengthen  the  election  security  of California's  elections  and  ensure  that  every method 
utilized by Californians to vote is as  secure as it can be. 
(b)  To  ensure that all eligible Californians have an equal  ability to  cast their vote without delay 
and without sacrificing their right to  a private ballot, including overseas voters, military serving 
overseas,  disabled  voters  and  emergency workers  whose  responsibilities  may  take  them  away 
from their homes. 
(c)  To  focus  on  the  future  of voting  in  California  and  ensure  that  any  systems  employed  are 
current, secure and transparent. 
(d)  To  ensure  that  our  foremost  experts  in  elections  administration  and  scientific  expertise  in 
cryptography and cyber security are working together to  guarantee the security of our elections. 
(e) To guarantee that all votes are recorded and counted correctly and are verifiable. 

SECTION 4. DEFINITIONS 

Section 300 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 300. "Vote by mail voter" and "Military or overseas voter" definitions. 

(a)  "Vote by mail  voter" means  any voter casting a ballot in  any way other than  at  the polling 
place. 
(b) "Military or overseas  voter" means  an  elector absent from  the  county in which he  or she is 
otherwise eligible to vote who is any of the following: 
(1) A member of the active or reserve components of the United States Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Marine Corps, or Coast Guard;  a Merchant Marine;  a member of the United States Public Health 
Service  Commissioned  Corps;  a  member  of  the  National  Oceanic  and  Atmospheric 
Administration Commissioned Corps of the United States; or a member on activated status of the 
National Guard or state militia. 
(2) A citizen of the United States living outside of the territorial limits of the United States or the 

District of Columbia. 

(J2) A spouse or dependent of a person described in paragraph (1 ). 

(c)  "Overseas  voter" means  an  elector absent from  the  county in  which  he  or she  is  otherwise 
eligible  to  vote who  is  a citizen of the  United States  living outside of the  territorial limits  of the 
United States or the District ofColumbia. 

2 


(d)  "Military or overseas voter" means either a military voter as described in subdivision  (b)  or 
an overseas voter as described in subdivision (c). 

Section 301  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 301. "Ballot" def'mition. 

A "ballot" means any of the following: 
(a) A single card with prescored, number positions that is marked by the voter with a punching 
device and the accompanying reference page or pages containing the names of candidates and 
the ballot titles of measures to be voted on with numbered positions corresponding to the 
numbers on the card. 
(b) One or more cards upon which are printed the names of the candidates and the ballot titles of 
measures to be voted on by punching or marking in the designated area. 
(c) One or more sheets ofpaper upon which are printed the names of candidates and the ballot 
titles of measures to be voted on by marking the designated area and that are tabulated manually 
or by optical scanning equipment. 
(d) A large sheet of paper upon which is printed the names of candidates and ballot titles of 
measures to be voted on by pressing the designated area on a direct-recording electronic device. 
(e) An electronic touchscreen upon which appears the names of candidates and ballot titles of 
measures to be voted on by touching the designated area on the screen of a direct-recording 
electronic device. 
(j) A  vote by mail ballot returned using software andprocedures for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots certified by the Election Data Security Commission for use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 .. 

' 

. 

Section 321  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 321. "Elector" def'mition. 

(a) "Elector"  means  any  person  who  is  a  United  States  citizen  18  years  of age  or  older  and, 
except as specified in subdivision (b ), is a resident of an election precinct at least 15 days prior to 
an election. 
(b) "Elector"  also  means  any person· described in. paragraph  (2)  of subdivision (be)  of Section 
300, who, except for the residence requirement specified in subdivision (a), is eligible to vote in 
this state and meets any of the following conditions: 
(1) He  or she  was  a  resident  of this  state  when he or  she  was  last living  within the  territorial 
limits of the United States or the District of Columbia. 
(2) He or she was born outside of the United States or the District of Columbia, his or her parent 
or legal  guardian was  a  resident of this  state when the parent or legal  guardian was last living 
within the territorial limits of the United States or the District of Columbia, and he or she has not 
previously registered to vote in any other state. 
(c) Each person qualifying as  an elector under subdivision (b) shall be deemed to be a resident of 
this state for purposes of this code and Section 2 of Article II of the California Constitution. 

3 


Section 322.5 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as  follows: 

§ 322. 5.  "Electronic submission" definition. 

"Electronic submission" or "electronically submit" means that a voter submits a vote by mail 
ballot using software andprocedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots 
certified by the Election Data Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c) 
ofsection 2603. 

Section 355 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 355.  "Software" definition. 

"Software" includes all programs, voting devices, cards, ballot cards or papers, operating 
manuals or instructions, test procedures, printouts, and other nonmechanical or nonelectoral 
items necessary to the operation of a voting system.  "Software" also includes any program or 
programs for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots certified by the Election Data 
Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 358 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 358. "Vote tabulating device" defmition. 

"Vote tabulating device" means any piece of equipment, other than a voting machine, that 
compiles a total of votes cast by means of ballot card sorting, ballot card reading, paper ballot 
scanning, electronic data processing, software for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots certified by the Election Data Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603,  or a combination of that type of equipment. 

Section 360 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 360. "Voting device" defmition. 

"Voting device" means any device used in conjunction with a ballot cBrd er cBrds to indicate the 
choice of the voter by marking, punching, or slotting the ballot eaRh or selecting the choice of 
the voter using software for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots certified by the 
Election Data Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 
2603. 

Section 361  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 361. "Voting machine" defmition. 

"Voting machine" means any electronic device, including, but not limited to, a precinct optical 
scanner, arui a direct recording voting system or software for secure electronic submission of 
vote by mail ballots certified by the Election Data Security Commission for use statewide 

4 


pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603, into which a voter may enter his or her votes, and 
which, by means of electronic tabulation and generation of printouts or other tangible, human­
readable records, furnishes a total of the number of votes cast for each candidate and for or 
against each measure. 

Section 362 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 362 "Voting system" definition. 

"Voting system" means a mechanical, electromechanical, or electronic system and its software, 
including software for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots certified by the 
Election Data Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofsection 2603, 
or any combination of these used for casting a ballot, tabulating votes, or both. "Voting system" 
does not include a ballot marking system. 

SECTION 5. ELECTION DATA SECURITY COMMISSION 

Division 3.5  (cmmnencing with Section 2600)  is  hereby added to  the  Elections Code to read  as 
follows: 

§ 2600. Establishment; Membership; Appointments; Terms ofoffice. 

(a)  There is hereby established in state government the Election Data Security Commission. 
(b)  The  Commission shall be nonpartisan and comprised ofexperts in voting systems,  voting 
system security,  conduct ofelections,  computer system security,  or encryption technology. 
(c)  The Commission shall have seven (7)  members,  including the chair. 
(d)  The Secretary ofState shall serve as the Chair. 
(e)  The other six (6)  members shall be citizens ofthe  United States and shall be appointed by the 
Governor. 
(!)  Members ofthe Commission,  other than the chairman,  shall serve at the pleasure ofthe 
Governor and shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement ofreasonable travel 
expenses related to their duties. 
(g)  Two years following the certification ofthe software and procedures for electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603,  the Commission 
shall cease to exist.  The Secretary ofState shall assume the duties and responsibilities ofthe 
Commission,  including any required updates ofthe software and procedures for electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots and any required updates to regulations governing escrow 
accounts holding certified source code.  Any remaining funds ofthe Commission shall revert to 
the general fund ofthe State of California.  Any remaining assets or other tangible inventory of 
the Commission shall revert to the Secretary ofState's office. 
(h) Members ofthe Commission shall be deemed public officials as defined in  Government Code 
Section 82048 and shall be subject to  the conflict ofinterest provisions in Section 87100 and 
Section I 090 ofthe Government Code,  subject to the following exceptions: 

5 


(1)  The adoption ofstandards for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots and the 
certification ofsoftware and procedures for statewide use by the Commission shall not be 
considered governmental decisions subject to Section 87100. 
(2) A governmental decision,  including approval ofa contract,  that has an  effect on the 
member's industry,  trade, profession or other identifiable interest represented on the 
Commission shall not be considered a financial interest under Section 87100 or Section 1090 so 
long as there is no unique effect on the member's interests. 
(3)  Ifa member ofthe Commission is an officer or employee ofa company or owns stock in a 
company,  the Commission may enter into a contract with the company so long as the interested 
member discloses his or her interest to  the Commission,  has the interest noted in the official 
records ofthe Commission and disqualifies himselfor herself from participating in the decision 
or attempting to  influence the decision in any way. 
(i)  The  Commission shall adopt a Conflict ofInterest Code pursuant to Section 87300 ofthe 
Government Code requiring disclosure ofincome and investments related to  voting systems, 
voting system security,  conduct ofelections,  computer system security,  and encryption 
technology.  This code is not subject to review by the Fair Political Practices Commission. 
Notwithstanding Section 87302.6 ofthe Government Code,  members ofthe  Commission shall, 
within 30 days ofassuming office, file a statement disclosing his or her income and investments 
related to  voting systems,  voting system security,  conduct ofelections,  computer system security, 
and encryption technology received during the 12 months before assuming office. A member of 
the Commission shall file his or her statements pursuant to Section 87302 ofthe Government 
Code once the agency adopts a Conflict ofInterest Code. 
0) The  California Public Records Act, Article 1 (commencing with Section 6250)  ofChapter 3.5 
ofDivision  7 ofTitle 1 ofthe Government Code shall apply to all records ofthe Commission 
except any records related to source code for electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots. No 
later than 10 business days after the Commission certifies software and procedures for secure 
electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603,  the 
Commission shall cause an exact copy ofthe approved source code for each component ofthe 
electronic submission system to  be transferred directly from the Commission and deposited into 
an approved escrow facility.  The materials deposited in escrow shall include build and 
configuration instructions and documents so that a neutral third party may create, from  the 
source code in escrow,  executable object codes identical to  the code used for the electronic 
submission system. 
(I) The Election Data Security Commission shall adopt regulations relating to all ofthe 
following: 
(A)  The definition ofsource code components for the electronic submission system,  including 
source code for all firmware and software. Firmware and software shall include commercial off­
the-shelf or other third-party firmware and software that is used by the electronic submission 
system. 
(B)  Specifications for the escrow facility,  including security and environmental specifications 
necessary for the preservation ofthe source code. 
(C)  Procedures for submitting the source code. 
(D)  Criteria for access to  the source code. 
(2)  The Election Data Security Commission or the Secretary ofState shall have reasonable 
access to  the materials placed in escrow,  under any ofthe following circumstances: 

6 


(A) In the course ofan investigation or prosecution regarding vote counting or ballot marking 
equipment or procedures. 
(B)  Upon a finding by the Secretary ofState that an escrow facility or escrow company is unable 
or unwilling to maintain materials in escrow in compliance with this section or regulations 
adopted by the Election Data Security Commission. 
(C) In order to fulfill the provisions ofthis chapter related to updating the electronic submission 
system. 
(D) In order to verify that the software used by a county is identical to  the certified version. 
(E)  For any other purpose deemed necessary to fulfill the provisions ofthis code or Section 
12172.5 ofthe Government Code. 
(3)  The Secretary ofState may seek injunctive reliefrequiring the elections officials,  approved 
escrow facility,  or any vendor or manufacturer ofa voting system or part ofa voting system to 
comply with this section and related regulations.  Venue for a proceeding under this section shall 
be exclusively in Sacramento County. 
(k) The Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act, Article 9 (commencing with Section 11120) ofChapter 
1 ofPart 1 ofDivision 3 ofTitle 2 ofthe Government Code,  shall apply to all meetings ofthe 
Commission. 
(l)  The Administrative Procedures Act,  Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) ofPart 1 
ofDivision 3 ofTitle 2 ofthe Government Code shall not apply to any rulemaking by the 
Commission. 

Section 2601.1  is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 2600.1  Funding 

(a)  The Legislature shall appropriate funds from the General Fund ofthe State ofCalifornia up 
to $1, 000, 000 per calendar year for establishment and ongoing operations ofthe Election Data 
Security Commission. 
(b)  The Legislature shall appropriate funds from the General Fund ofthe State ofCalifornia to 
the Secretary ofState for use by the Election Data Security Commission in the amount oftwenty 
million dollars ($20,000,000) by July 1,  2017 or upon adoption ofthe 2017-2018 state budget, 
whichever occurs later,  to cover the costs ofthe Election Data Security Commission in carrying 
out its duties under Sections 2601,  2602 and 2603 ofthe Elections Code.  Provided,  however, no 
more than.five percent (5%)  ofthe.funds appropriated by the Legislature pursuant this 
subdivision shall be used to pay administrative costs.  For purposes ofthis section,  the State 
Controller shall define administrative costs.  The Controller shall allocate from the twenty 
million dollars ($20, 000, 000) appropriated to the Secretary ofState to reimburse the 
Department ofGeneral Services for services provided pursuant to section 2601 and to reimburse 
the Controller for services provided pursuant to this subdivision. 
(c)  The Legislature shall appropriate funds from the General Fund ofthe State ofCalifornia to 
reimburse counties for the costs ofimplementing secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots pursuant to Section 2604. 
(d)  The Legislature shall appropriate funds from  the  General Fund of the  State  of California  to 
the Secretary ofState for use by the  Commission,  and for use by the Secretary ofState once the 
commission  ceases  to  exist pursuant to  subdivision  (g)  of section  2600,  to  pay ongoing  costs 

7 


associated  with  maintenance  of the  system  developed  and  certified  for  secure  electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots. 

Section 2601  is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 2601. Staffing and Procurement Authority 

(a)  The Commission is authorized to hire an Executive Director exempt from the civil service 
under Article VIL  sec.  4 (e)  ofthe California Constitution who shall.serve at the pleasure ofthe 
Commission.  The Commission shall set the salary for the Executive Director,  which shall not 
exceed the salary ofthe Director ofthe Department ofTechnology as published by the 
Department ofHuman Resources in the Exempt Pay Scale.  The Commission is authorized to hire 
such staffas it deems necessary to  carry out the Commission's duties. 
(b)  The  Commission is authorized,  in its independent discretion,  to  contract with such 
consultants and vendors as it deems necessary to  carry out the Commission's duties as described 
in Sections 2602 and 2603.  Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall be exempt 
from Part 2 (commencing with Section 10100) ofDivision 2 ofthe Public Contract Code; Part 1, 
Chapter 5. 6 (commencing with Section 11545) ofTitle 2,  Division 3 ofthe Government Code; 
and any implementing regulations,  including,  without limitation,  those stated in the State 
Contracting Manual and the State Administrative Manual.  The Secretary ofState is authorized to 
assume any such contractual obligations or benefits continuing after the time the Commission 
ceases to  exist. 
(c)  When contracting for services other than the development ofa system for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots,  the Commission shall use a competitive process to enable the 
timely acquisition ofservices to meet the Commission's needs in the most value-effective manner, 
which process shall include the following: 
(1)  The  Commission shall prepare a solicitation document which shall include a clear, precise 
description ofthe work to be performed or services to be provided; a description ofthe format 
that bids or proposals shall follow and the elements they shall contain; the standards the 
Commission will use in evaluating and scoring bids or proposals; the date on which bids or 
proposals are due; and the timetable the Commission will follow in reviewing and evaluating 
them.  Ifthe Commission will score faciors other than price,  then the solicitation document shall 
require bidders to submit proposals with the bidprice and all cost information in a separate, 
sealed envelope,  and the results ofthe evaluation ofnon-cost factors shall be published 
immediately before the opening ofcost proposals. 
(2)  The solicitation document shall not be drafted in a manner that limits the bidding directly or 
indirectly to any one bidder. 
(3) At least ten (10) working days prior to the deadline to submit bids or proposals,  the 
Commission shall advertise the contract in the California State Contracts Register and solicit all 
potential contractors known to  the Commission.  The Commission shall not release its 
solicitation document prior to publication ofnotice in the California State Contracts Register. 
(4)  The  Commission shall issue a notice ofintent to award to all bidders or proposers at least 
five (5)  working days prior to awarding the contract.  At that time,  all bids or proposals shall be 
available for public inspection. 
(5) If, prior to contract award,  any bidder files a protest with the Commission against the 
awarding ofthe contract on the ground that its bid or proposal should have been selected in 

8 


accordance with the selection criteria in the solicitation document,  then the following procedure, 
at a minimum, shall apply: 
(A)  The contract shall not be awarded until either the protest has been withdrawn or the 
Commission has made a final decision on the protest. 
(B)  Within five (5)  calendar days after filing a protest,  the protesting bidder shall file with the 
Commission a full and complete written statement specifying in detail the grounds ofthe protest 
and the facts in support thereof 
(C)  The proposal evaluation team shall respond in writing to  the written statement detailing the 
grounds ofprotest. 
(D)  The  Commission shall issue a written decision on the protest. No  Commission member that 
participated in the evaluation or scoring ofbids or proposals or selection ofthe intended 
awardee shall participate in deciding the protest. 
(6)The Department ofGeneral Services,  Office ofLegal Services,  shall be available to  advise the 
Commission. 
(d)  In procuring software development services for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots,  an  expedited negotiation process is necessary to  identify different types ofsolutions to 
fulfill the business need or purpose and to ensure that the State is receiving the best value.  The 
Commission shall use a competitive process to select its software development contractor.  The 
Department ofGeneral Services shall be available to advise the Commission and participate in 
negotiations,  ifand to  the extent requested.  The  Commission 's  competitive process shall comply 
with the following: 
(1)  The  Commission shall use a negotiated procurement process substantially similar to  that 
providedfor in State Contracting Manual,  Volume 3,  Chapter 2,  Topic 5,  Section 2. C5. 5. 
(2)Prior to  crafting its solicitation document,  the Commission shall solicit and consider input 
from interested individuals and groups with respect to  best practices for developing similar 
software systems,  maintaining cyber security,  and other appropriate topics.  Such input may be 
solicited concurrent with,  or as part of, the evaluation ofexisting systems under subdivision (a) 
ofSection 2602. 
(A) Any input received by the Commission shall be a public record subject to disclosure under 
the  California Public Records Act. 
(B)  Providing input shall not constitute a conflict ofinterest or otherwise disqualify any potential 
bidder,  unless the bidder provides input under a contract with the Commission for such input. 
(3)Based on a request for qualifications noticed in the California State Contracts Register,  the 
Commission shall prequalify bidders to submit proposals based on objective criteria assessing 
experience on similar projects; financial capabilities; and past performance problems or 
terminations,  including suspension or debarment.  The  Commission shall not disqualify any 
bidder solely on the ground that the bidder has not previously developed a system for secure 
electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots. 
(4)  The  Commission shall provide for a process by which potential bidders may protest the 
requestfor qualifications or the solicitation document prior to submittal deadlines on the ground 
that the request or solicitation is unfairly restrictive,  ambiguous,  or contains conflicting 
provisions or mistakes.  Failure to protest any such concern will waive the potential bidder's 
right to raise such grounds in a protest ofa contract award. 
(5)  The 5 percent small business preference provided for in Chapter 6. 5 (commencing with 
Section 14835) ofPart 5.5 ofDivision 3 ofTitle 2 ofthe Government Code and the regulations 
implementing that chapter shall apply. 

9 


(6) A disabled veteran business enterprise preference ofnot less than 3 percent,  as provided for 
in Article 6 (commencing with Section 999) ofChapter 6 ofDivision 4 ofthe Military and 
Veterans  Code and the regulations implementing that article,  shall apply. 
(7)  Ifbidders are permitted to submit a Best and Final Offer (BAFO)  to  the  Commission,  they 
shall be permitted to  base the BAFO on contract language negotiated with any bidder. 
(8)  After completing negotiations,  the Commission shall issue a notice ofintent to award to all 
bidders identifying the successful proposer. 
(9)  The  Commission shall not adopt an administrative process for protests ofthe results ofthe 
negotiations.  An unsuccessful bidder may file a petition for a writ ofmandate in accordance 
with Section 1085 ofthe Code ofCivil Procedure to  challenge any contract award.  The venue 
shall be Sacramento,  California.  Any writ ofmandate challenging an award shall be filed within 
ten (10)  days ofthe notice ofintent to award.  Failure ofa bidder to file a writ ofmandate within 
the specified time shall waive any right to  challenge the award.  The hearing on any writ of 
mandate challenging the award shall occur no later than ninety (90)  days after the writ petition 
is filed. 
(e) In exercising its contracting authority and without compliance with the above contracting 
procedures,  the  Commission may use contracting vehicles established under Public Contract 
Code sections 10290.1 and/or 12101.5, such as master agreements or multiple award schedule 
contracts,  including California Multiple Award Schedule contracts or federal General Service 
Administration Multiple Awards Schedules. 

Section 2602 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 2602. Evaluation ofexisting systems; Development ofstandards. 

(a)  The  Commission shall evaluate the integrity and security ofall existing voting systems and 
the integrity and security ofall data collected and transmitted by all existing voting systems, 
provided, however,  the Commission shall not undertake a full certification or recertification of 
any voting systems as provided for in Division 19.  The  Commission shall specifically evaluate 
the integrity and security ofcurrent vote by mail and electronic voting systems and shall report 
on the security and secrecy ofvotes submitted by military voters.  The Commission shall issue a 
report no later than December 31,  2018 summarizing the results ofthis evaluation and 
identifying any voting systems or statutes that should be amended to safeguard the results of 
elections and guarantee that voters choices are kept secure and private, particularly the votes of 
military voters.  This report shall be submitted to  the Secretary ofState and the Legislature and 
shall also be made available to  the public on the Internet website maintained by the Secretary of 
State or the Commission or both no later than December 31,  2018. 
(b)  The  Commission shall develop and approve rigorous standards for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots,  including standards for electronic verification ofvoter 
identity,  voter verification ofballot choices and canvassing ofballots that are electronically 
submitted, that are as secure as or more secure than the standards applicable to  the return of 
unencrypted vote by mail ballots no later than December 31,  2019.  The standards developed 
and approved by the Commission shall provide for secure and secret voting by military voters. 
The purpose ofthese standards is to ensure the fullest possible integrity and security ofvotes 
returned by electronic submission. 

10 


(c)  The standards developed by the Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  may be updated from 
time to  time as the Commission deems necessary to  ensure the security ofelectronic submission 
ofvote by mail ballots.  After the Commission ceases to  exist,  the Secretary ofState shall assume 
responsibility for updating these standards. 

Section 2603 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 2603. Pilot programs; Certification 

(a)  The Commission shall develop software and procedures for voters to  electronically submit 
vote by mail ballots andfor elections officials to  canvass vote by mail ballots that are 
electronically submitted that comply with the standards adopted pursuant to subdivision (b)  of 
Section 2602.  The software and procedures developed under this subdivision shall comply with 
Section 21081 ofTitle 52 ofthe  United States Code. 
(b)  The Commission shall conduct pilot programs for military voters as defined subdivision (b) 
ofSection 300 to  test the software and procedures developed pursuant to subdivision (a).  Pilot 
programs may commence once the Commission approves standards for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2602,  including but not 
limited to  any special election held after that date,  and shall commence no later than the 
statewide general election to  be held in November of2022.  The  Commission shall select counties 
to participate in pilot programs for military voters conducted pursuant to  this subdivis{on giving 
preference to  counties that volunteer to participate in pilot programs.  The pilot program shall be 
consistent with existing Federal law applicable to military voters,  including but not limited to, 
Chapter 203 ofTitle 52 ofthe United States Code.  The pilot programs conducted pursuant to  this 
subdivision shall safeguard the results ofelections and guarantee that vote returned by military 
voters by secure electronic submission are secure and secret. 
(c)  Upon completion ofpilot programs providedfor in subdivision (b),  the  Commission shall 
evaluate the software and procedures used to  conduct the pilot programs against the standards 
developed pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2602.  Ifthese standards are satisfied,  the 
Commission shall certify the software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by 
mail ballots and canvassing ballots electronically submitted for use statewide. Ifthese standards 
are not satisfied,  the Commission shall update the software and procedures for additional pilot 
programs pursuant to subdivision (b).  The  Commission shall continue this process until pilot 
programs satisfy the standards developed pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2602. 

Section 2604 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 2604. Electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots. 

Each elections official in the State ofCalifornia is required to provide for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots using the software and procedures developed by the 
Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 no later than the next election held in 
that jurisdiction not less than 120 days after the Commission certifies software and procedures 
for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

11 


SECTION 6.  ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF VOTE BY MAIL BALLOTS 

Section 3005 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3005. Mailed ballot precinct. 

(a)  Whenever, on the 88th day before the election, there are 250 or less persons registered to vote 
in any precinct, the elections official may furnish each voter with a vote by mail ballot along 
with a statement that there will be no polling place for the election. The elections official shall 
also notify each voter of the location of the two nearest polling places in the event the voter 
chooses to return the ballot on election day. The voter shall not be required to file an application 
for the vote by mail ballot and the ballot shall be sent as soon as the ballots are available. 
(b)The statement provided to each voter pursuant to subdivision (a)  shall include a notice that 
the voter is eligible to return his or her vote by mail ballot by secure electronic submission.  This 
notice is only required once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and 
procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(c)  No precinct shall be divided in order to conform to this section. 

Section 3006 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3006. Form of printed application for vote by mail ballot. 

(a) A printed application that is to be distributed to a voter for requesting a vote by mail voter's 
ballot shall inform the voter that the application for the vote by mail voter's ballot must be 
received by the elections official not later than seven days prior to the date ofthe election and 
shall contain spaces for the following: 
(1) The printed name and residence address of the voter as it appears on the affidavit of 
registration. 
(2) The address to which the ballot is to be mailed. 
(3) The voter's signature. 
(4) The name and date of the election for which the request is to be made. 
(b) (1) The information required by paragraphs (1) and ( 4) of subdivision ( a) may be preprinted 
on the application. The information required by paragraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision (a) shall be 
personally affixed by the voter. 
(2) An address, as required by paragraph (2) of subdivision (a), may not be the address of a 
political party, a political campaign headquarters, or a candidate's residence. However, a 
candidate, his or her spouse, immediate family members, and any other voter who shares the 
same residence address as the candidate may request that a vote by mail ballot be mailed to the 
candidate's residence address. 
(3) An application that contains preprinted information shall contain a conspicuously printed 
statement substantially similar to the following:  "You have the legal right to mail or deliver this 
application directly to the local elections official of the county where you reside." 
(4) A printed vote by mail application that allows a voter to submit the application by mail shall 
inform the voter of the address for the elections official and specify that address as the only 
appropriate destination address for mailing the application. Nothing in this subdivision shall be 

12 


construed to prohibit an individual, organization, or group that distributes applications for vote 
by mail voter ballots from collecting or receiving applications from voters, as described in 
Section 3008, by means other than having the applications mailed directly to the address of the 
distributing individual, organization, or group. 
(c) The application shall inform the voter that ifhe or she has declined to disclose a preference 
for a political party, the voter may request a vote by mail ballot for a particular political party for 
the partisan primary election, if that political party has adopted a party rule, duly noticed to the 
Secretary of State, authorizing that vote.  The application shall contain a toll-free telephone 
number, established by the Secretary of State, that the voter may call to access information 
regarding which political parties have adopted such a rule. The application shall contain a 
checkoff box with a conspicuously printed statement that reads substantially similar to the 
following: "I have declined to disclose a preference for a qualified political party. However, for 
this primary election only, I request a vote by mail ballot for the 
the political party shall be personally affixed by the voter. 
(d) The application shall provide the voter with infonnation concerning the procedure for 
establishing permanent vote by mail voter status, and the basis upon which pennanent vote by 
mail voter status is claimed. 
(e)  The application shall provide the voter with a notice that upon approval ofthe application 
the voter is eligible to return his or her vote by mail ballot by secure electronic submission.  This 
notice is only required once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and 
procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
fe) (!) The application shall be attested to by the voter as to the truth and correctness of its 
content, and shall be signed under penalty of perjury. 

Party." The name of 

Section 3007.5 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§  3007.5.  Secretary  of State  to  prepare  uniform  electronic  application  for  a  vote  by  mail 
ballot. 

(a) The Secretary of State shall prepare and distribute to  appropriate elections officials a uniform 
electronic application format for a vote by mail voter's ballot that conforms to this section. 
(b)  The unifonn electronic application shall inform the voter that the application for the vote by 
mail voter's ballot must be received by the elections official not later than seven days prior to the 
date of the election and shall contain spaces for at least the following infonnation: 
(1)  The  name  and  residence  address  of the  registered  voter  as  it  appears  on  the  affidavit  of 
registration. 
(2) The address to which the ballot is to be mailed. 
(3) The name and date of the election for which the request is made. 
(4) The date of birth of the registered voter. 
(c)  The  uniform  electronic  application  shall  inform the voter  that  if he  or  she  has  declined  to 
disclose  a  preference  for  a  political  party,  the  voter  may  request  a  vote  by mail  ballot  for  a 
particular political  party for  the  partisan  primary election,  if that political  party has  adopted  a 
party rule,  duly noticed  to  the  Secretary  of State,  authorizing  that  vote.  The  application  shall 
contain  a  toll-free  telephone  number,  established  by the  Secretary of State,  that the voter may 
call  to  access  information  regarding  which  political  parties  have  adopted  such  a  rule.  The 

13 


application shall list the parties that have notified the Secretary of State of the adoption of such a 
rule.  The application  shall  contain  a  checkoff box with  a  conspicuously printed  statement that 
reads  substantially  similar  to  the  following:  "I  have  declined  to  disclose  a  preference  for  a 
qualified political party.  However, for this primary election only,  I request a vote by mail ballot 
for the __ Party." The name of the political party shall be personally affixed by the voter. 
(d)  The  uniform  electronic  application  shall  contain  a  conspicuously  printed · statement 
substantially similar to the following:  "Only the registered voter himself or herself may apply for 
a vote by mail ballot.  An application for  a vote by mail ballot made by a person other than the 
registered voter is a criminal offense." 
(e)  The  uniform  electronic  application  shall  include  a  statement  substantially  similar  to  the 
following: "A ballot will not be sent to you if this application is incomplete or inaccurate." 
(f)  The uniform electronic application shall provide the voter with a notice that upon approval of 
the  application the voter is eligible to  return  his  or her vote by mail ballot by secure electronic 
submission.  This  notice  is  only required once  the  EleGtion  Data  Security  Commission  certifies 
software  and  procedures  for  secure  electronic  submission  of vote  by  mail  ballots  for  use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(!)  (g)  The uniform  electronic application  format  shall not permit the form  to  be electronically 
submitted unless  all  of the information required to  complete the  application is contained in the 
appropriate fields. 

Section 3007.8 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3007.8 Apply for a vote by mail voter's ballot by phone. 

(a) A local elections official may offer a voter the ability to apply for a vote by mail voter's 
ballot by telephone. 
(b) To apply by telephone, the applicant shall provide to the .elections official personal 
identifying information that matches the information contained on the applicant's affidavit of 
registration, including first and last name, home address, and date of birth. The applicant's 
signature shall not be required. 
(c) A person shall not apply for a vote by mail voter's ballot pursuant to this section using the 
name of, or on behalf of, another person. 
(d) Prior to being asked for personal identifying information, an applicant applying for a vote by 
mail voter's ballot pursuant to this section shall be advised as follows: 
"Only the registered voter himself or herself may apply for a vote by mail ballot. An application 
for a vote by mail ballot that is made by any person other than the registered voter is a criminal 
offense." 
(e) Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions of this code governing written 
applications for vote by mail voters' ballots shall apply to applications made by telephone. 
(f)  Upon completion ofthe application by telephone,  the voter shall be advised as follows: 
"Ifyour vote by mail application is approved, you are eligible to return your vote by mail ballot 
by secure electronic submission. " This notice is only required once the Election Data Security 
Commission certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

14 

Section 3009.5 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 3009.5. Automatic eligibility to electronically submit vote by mail ballot. 

Any voter who submits an application to  vote by mail that is approved by an elections official is 
automatically  eligible  to  return  that  vote  by  mail ballot by· secure  electronic submission.  This 
Section goes  into  effect 120 days  after the  date  that the  Commission  certifies the  software and 
procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 3010 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3010. Supplies delivered to applicant. 

The elections official shall deliver to each qualified applicant: 
(a)  The ballot for the precinct in which he or she resides. In primary elections this shall also be 
accompanied by the ballot for the central committee of the party for which the voter has 
disclosed a preference, if any. 
(b)  All supplies necessary for the use and return of the ballot and any identification information 
necessary for the voter to access the secure electronic submission software once the Election . 
Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
No  officer  of this  state  may make  any  charge  for  services  rendered  to  any  voter  under  this 
chapter. 

Section 3017 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3017. Return of voted ballot. 

(a) All  vote by mail ballots  cast under this  division shall be voted on or before the  day of the 
election.  After  marking  the  ballot,  tThe  vote  by mail  voter  shall  do  any  of the  following:  (1) 
return the ballot by mail or in person to  the elections official from whom it came,  (2) return the 
ballot in person to  a member of a precinct board at a polling place within the jurisdiction, 0f (3) 
return the ballot to  the  elections  official  from  whom it came  at  a  vote by mail  ballot  drop-off 
location,  if provided  pursuant  to  Section  3025  or  (4)  return  the  completed  ballot  by  secure 
electronic  submission  using  software  and procedures  certified  by  the  Election  Data  Security 
Commission for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 once that certification 
occurs  and is  adopted in  the  voter's  county.  However,  a  vote by mail  voter who  is  unable to 
return the ballot may designate his or her spouse, child, parent, grandparent, grandchild, brother, 
sister, or a person residing in the same household as the vote by mail voter to return the ballot to 
the  elections  official  from  whom it came or to  the precinct board at  a polling place within the 
jurisdiction. The ballot must, however, be received by either the elections official from whom it 
came or the precinct board before the close of the polls on election day. 

15 


(b) The elections official shall establish procedures to  ensure the secrecy of a ballot returned to  a 
precinct polling place and the security,  confidentiality, and integrity of any personal information 
collected, stored, or otherwise used pursuant to this section. 
(c) On  or before  March  1,  2008,  the  elections  official  shall  establish  procedures  to  track  and 
confirm  the  receipt  of voted  vote  by mail  ballots  and  to  make  this  information  available  by 
means of online access using the county's elections division Internet Web site. If the county does 
not have  an elections division Internet Web  site,  the elections official  shall  establish a  toll-free 
telephone number that may be used to  confirm the date a voted vote by mail ballot was received. 
(d) The provisions of this section are mandatory, not directory, and a ballot shall not be counted 
if it is not delivered in compliance with this section. 
(e) Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  a vote by mail voter's ballot shall not be returned by a paid 
or  volunteer  worker  of  a  general  purpose  committee,  controlled  committee,  independent 
expenditure committee,  political party,  candidate's campaign committee,  or any other group  or 
organization  at  whose  behest  the  individual  designated  to  return  the  ballot  is  perfonning  a 
service. However, this subdivision does not apply to a candidate or a candidate's spouse. 

Section 3019 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3019. Comparing Signatures. 

(a)  Upon receipt of a vote by mail ballot, returned by mail or in person,  the elections official 
shall compare the signature on the identification envelope with either ofthe following to 
determine if the signatures compare: 
(1)  The signature appearing on the voter's affidavit ofregistration or a previous affidavit of 
registration of the voter. 
(2)  The signature appearing on a form issued by an elections official that contains the voter's 
signature and that is part of the voter's registration record. 
(b)  In comparing signatures pursuant to subdivision (a), the elections official may use the 
duplicate file of affidavits of registered voters or facsimiles of voters' signatures if the method of 
preparing and displaying the facsimiles complies with the law. 
(c)  (1) Ifupon conducting the comparison of signatures pursuant to subdivision (a) the elections 
official determines that the signatures compare, he or she shall deposit the ballot, still in the 
identification envelope, in a ballot container in his or her office. 
(2)  Ifupon conducting the comparison of signatures pursuant to subdivision (a) the elections 
official determines that the signatures do not compare, the identification envelope shall not be 
opened and the ballot shall not be counted. The cause ofthe rejection shall be written on the face 
ofthe identification envelope. 
(d)  The variation of a signature caused by the substitution of initials for the first or middle name, 
or both, shall not be grounds for the elections official to determine that the signatures do not 
compare. 
(e)  In comparing signatures pursuant to this section, an elections official may use signature 
verification technology. If signature verification technology determines the signatures do not 
compare, the elections official shall not reject the ballot unless he or she visually examines the 
signatures and verifies that the signatures do not compare. 
(f)  (1)  (A)  Notwithstanding any other law, if an elections official determines that a voter has 

16 


failed to sign the identification envelope, the elections official shall not reject the vote by mail 
ballot if the voter does any of the following: 
(i)  Signs the identification envelope at the office ofthe elections official during regular business 
hours before 5 p.m. on the eighth day after the election. 
(ii)  Before 5 p.m. on the eighth day after the election, completes and submits an unsigned ballot 
statement in substantially the following form: 

"UNSIGNED BALLOT STATEMENT 

County, 

, am a registered voter of 

I, 
State of California. I do solemnly swear ( or affirm) that I requested and returned a vote by mail 
ballot and that I have not and will not vote more than one ballot in this election. I understand that 
if I commit or attempt any fraud in connection with voting, or if I aid or abet fraud or attempt to 
aid or abet fraud in connection with voting, I may be convicted of a felony punishable by 
imprisomnent for 16.months or two or three years,.  I understand that my failure to sign this 
statement means that my vote by mail ballot will be invalidated. 
D  Voter's Signature 
D  Address" 

(iii)  Before the close of the polls on election day, completes and submits an unsigned ballot 
statement, in the form described in clause (ii), to a polling place within the county or a ballot 
dropoffbox. 
(B)  Iftimely submitted, the elections official shall accept any completed unsigned ballot 
statement. Upon receipt of the unsigned ballot statement, the elections official shall compare the 
voter's signature on the statement in the manner provided by this section. 
(i)  Ifthe elections official determines that the signatures compare, he or she shall attach the 
unsigned ballot statement to the identification envelope and deposit the ballot, still in the 
identification envelope, in a ballot container in his or her office. 
(ii)  Ifthe elections official determines that the signatures do not compare, the identification 
envelope shall not be opened and the ballot shall not be counted. 
(C)  An elections official may use methods other than those described in subparagraph (A) to 
obtain a voter's signature on an unsigned identification envelope. 
(2)  Instructions shall accompany the unsigned ballot statement in substantially the following 
form: 

"READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE COMPLETING THE 

STATEMENT. FAILURE TO FOLLOW THESE INSTRUCTIONS MAY CAUSE YOUR 

BALLOT NOT TO COUNT. 

1. In order to ensure that your vote by mail ballot will be counted, your statement 
should be completed and returned as soon as possible so that it can reach the elections 
official of the county in which your precinct is located no later than 5 p.m. on the 
eighth day after the election. 
2. You must sign your name on the line above (Voter's Signature). 
3. Place the statement into a mailing envelope addressed to your local elections official. 
Mail, deliver, or have delivered the completed statement to the elections official. Be 
sure there is sufficient postage if mailed and that the address of the elections official is 

17 


correct. 
4. Alternatively, you may submit your completed statement by facsimile transmission 
to your local elections official, or submit your completed statement to a polling place 
within the county or a ballot dropoffbox before the close of the polls on election day. 

(3)  An elections official shall include the unsigned ballot statement and instructions described in 
this subdivision on his or her Internet Web site, and shall provide the elections official's mailing 
address and facsimile transmission number on the Internet Web page containing the statement 
and instructions. 
(g)  A ballot shall not be removed from its identification envelope until the time for processing 
ballots. A ballot shall not be rejected for cause after the identification envelope has been opened. 
(h)  This section shall take effect immediately and be superseded on the date the Secretary of 

State certifies that the state has a statewide voter registration database that complies with the 

requirements ofthe federal Help America Vote Act of2002 (52  US.C.  Sec.  20901 et seq.) 


Section 3019 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3019. Comparing Signatures. 

(a)  Upon receipt of a vote by mail ballot, returned by mail or in person, the elections official 

shall compare the signature on the identification envelope with either of the following to 

determine if the signatures compare: 

(1)  The signature appearing on the voter's affidavit of registration or any previous affidavit of 

registration of the voter. 

(2)  The signature appearing on a form issued by an elections official that contains the voter's 

signature and that is part of the voter's registration record. 

(b)  In comparing signatures pursuant to subdivision (a), the elections official may use facsimiles 
of voters' signatures, provided that the method of preparing and displaying the facsimiles 
complies with the law. 
(c)  (1) Ifupon conducting the comparison of signatures pursuant to subdivision (a) the elections 
official determines that the signatures compare, he or she shall deposit the ballot, still in the 
identification envelope, in a ballot container in his or her office. 
(2)  Ifupon conducting the comparison of signatures pursuant to subdivision (a) the elections 
official determines that the signatures do not compare, the identification envelope shall not be 
opened and the ballot shall not be counted. The cause of the rejection shall be written on the face 
of the identification envelope. 
(d)  The variation of a signature caused by the substitution of initials for the first or middle name, 
or both, shall not be grounds for the elections official to determine that the signatures do not 
compare. 
(e)  In comparing signatures pursuant to this section, an elections official may use signature 
. verification technology. If signature verification technology determines the signatures do not 
compare, the elections official shall not reject the ballot unless he or she visually examines the 
signatures and verifies that the signatures do not compare. 
(f)  (1)  (A)  Notwithstanding any other law, if an elections official determines that a voter has 
failed to sign the identification envelope, the elections official shall not reject the vote by mail 

18 


ballot if the voter does any of the following: 
(i)  Signs the identification envelope at the office of the elections official during regular business 
hours before 5 p.m. on the eighth day after the election. 
(ii)  Before 5 p.m. on the eighth day after the election, completes and submits an unsigned ballot 
statement in substantially the following form: 

"UNSIGNED BALLOT STATEMENT 

am a registered voter of 

I, 
State of California. I do solemnly swear ( or affirm) that I requested and returned a vote by mail 
ballot and that I have not and will not vote more than one ballot in this election. I understand that 
if I commit or attempt any fraud in connection with voting, or if I aid or abet fraud or attempt to 
aid or abet fraud in connection with voting, I may be convicted of a felony punishable by 
imprisonment for 16 months or two or three years. I understand that my failure to sign this 
statement means that my vote by mail ballot will be invalidated. 
D  Voter's Signature 
D  Address" 

County, 

· 

(iii)  Before the close of the polls on election day, completes and submits an unsigned ballot 
statement, in the form described in clause (ii), to a polling place within the county or a ballot 
dropoffbox. 
(B)  Iftimely submitted, the elections official shall accept any completed unsigned ballot 
statement. Upon receipt of the unsigned ballot statement, the elections official shall compare the 
voter's signature on the statement in the manner provided by this section. 
(i)  Ifthe elections official determines that the signatures compare, he or she shall attach the 
unsigned ballot statement to the identification envelope and deposit the ballot, still in the 
identification envelope, in a ballot container in his or her office. 
(ii)  Ifthe elections official determines that the signatures do not compare, the identification 
envelope shall not be opened and the ballot shall not be counted. 
(C)  An elections official may use methods other than those described in subparagraph (A) to 
obtain a voter's signature on an unsigned identification envelope. 
(2)  Instructions shall accompany the unsigned ballot statement in substantially the following 
form: 

"READ THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE COMPLETING THE 

STATEMENT. FAILURE TO FOLLOW THESE INSTRUCTIONS MAY CAUSE YOUR 

. BALLOT NOT TO COUNT. 

1. In order to ensure that your vote by mail ballot will be counted, your statement should 
be completed and returned as soon as possible so that it can reach the elections official of 
the county in which your precinct is located no later than 5 p.m. on the eighth day after 
the election. 
2. You must sign your name on the line above (Voter's Signature). 
3. Place the statement into a mailing envelope addressed to your local elections official. 
Mail, deliver, or have delivered the completed statement to the elections official. Be sure 
there is sufficient postage if mailed and that the address of the elections official is correct. 
4. Alternatively, you may submit your completed statement by facsimile transmission to 

19 


your local elections official, or submit your completed statement to a polling place within 
the county or a ballot dropoff box before the close of the polls on election day. 

(3)  An elections official shall include the unsigned ballot statement and instructions described in 
this subdivision on his or her Internet Web slte, and shall provide the elections official's mailing 
address and facsimile transmission number on the Internet Web page containing the statement 
and instructions. 
(g)  A  ballot shall not be removed from  its identification envelope until the time for processing 
ballots. A ballot shall not be rejected for cause after the identification envelope has been opened. 
(i)  This  section shall take  effect on the  date  the  Secretary  of State  certifies that the state has a 
statewide  voter  registration  database  that complies  with  the  requirements  of the federal  Help 
America Vo.te Act of2002 (52  US.C.  Sec.  20901 et seq.). 

Section 3019.lis hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 3019.1.  Verifying ballots electronically submitted. 

The elections official shall verify voters who electronically submit their vote by mail ballots 
using electronic verification ofvoter identity certified for use statewide by the Election Data 
Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 3021  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3021. Request for vote by mail ballot after period for requesting 

(a)  After the close of the period for requesting vote by mail voter ballots by mail any voter 

unable to go to the polls because of illness or disability resulting in his or her confinement in a 

hospital, sanatorium, nursing home, or place ofresidence, or any voter unable because of a· 

physical handicap to go to his or her polling place or because of that handicap is unable to vote at 

his or her polling place due to existing architectural barriers at his or her polling place denying 

him or her physical access to the polling place, voting booth, or voting apparatus or machinery, 

or any voter unable to go to his or her polling place because of conditions resulting in his or her 

absence from the precinct on election day may request in a written statement, signed under 

penalty ofperjury that a ballot be delivered to him or her. This written statement shall not be 

required ifthe vote by mail ballot is voted in the office of the elections official as defined by 

subdivision (b) of Section 3018, at the time of the request. This ballot shall be delivered by the 

elections official to any authorized representative ofthe voter who presents this written statement 

to the elections official. 

(b)  Before delivering the ballot the elections official may compare the signature on the request 

with the signature on the voter's affidavit ofregistration, but in any event, the signature shall be 

compared before the vote by mail ballot is canvassed. 

(c}The voter shall do either ofthe following: 

(1) mark the ballot, place it in the identification envelope, fill out and sign the envelope and 

return the ballot, personally or through the authorized representative, to either the elections 

official or any polling place within the jurisdiction. 


20 

(2)  complete and return the ballot by secure electronic submission using software and 
procedures certified by the Election Data. Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 once that certification occurs and is adopted in the voter's 
county. 
(d)  These ballots shall be processed and counted in the same manner as other vote by mail 
ballots. 

Section 3021.5 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3021.5 Out-of-state emergency workers. 

(a) Upon the declaration of an out-of-state emergency by the Governor and the issuance of an 
executive order authorizing an out-of-state emergency worker to cast a ballot outside of his or 
her home precinct, a county elections official shall, upon request of an out-of-state emergency 
worker pursuant to this chapter, issue a vote by mail ballot to the out-of-state emergency worker 
using a process to be determined by that elections official. The process shall include all ofthe 
following: 
(1) Authorization for an out-of-state emergency worker to request a vote by mail ballot after the 
close of the vote by mail ballot application period specified in Section 3001. 
(2) Authorization for a vote by mail ballot and accompanying voting materials to be sent to an 
out-of-state emergency worker by mail, facsimile transmission, or electronic transmission, as 
requested by the out-of-state emergency worker. An elections official may use reasonable 
facsimiles of the sample ballots sent to voters as vote by mail ballots. 
(3) A requirement that an out-of-state emergency worker do  either ofthe following: 
(A)  mark the vote by mail ballot provided to him or her, place it in the vote by mail ballot 
identification envelope, and return the vote by mail ballot to the elections official from whom it 
was obtained. Ifno identification envelope is provided, the envelope used to return the vote by 
mail ballot to the elections official shall include the information required by subdivision (a) of 
Section 3011  and a statement signed under penalty of perjury that the voter is an out-of-state 
emergency worker. 
(B)  complete and return the ballot by secure electronic submission using software and 
procedures certified by the Election Data Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 once that certification occurs and is adopted in the voter's 
county. 
(b) In order to be counted, a vote by mail ballot cast pursuant to this section shall be received in 
compliance with Section 3020. 
(c) An elections official shall receive and canvass vote by mail ballots cast pursuant to this 
section by the same procedure as for all other vote by mail ballots cast pursuant to this chapter. 

Section 3404 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3404. Procedure for voting. 

The new resident shall do  either ofthe following: 

21 


(a)  mark the ballot, place it in the identification envelope, and fill out and sign the declaration 
printed on the identification envelope. 
(b)  complete and return the ballot by secure electronic submission using the software and 
procedures certified by the Election Data Security Commission for use statewide pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 once that certification occurs and is adopted in the voter's 
county. 

Section 4102 of.the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 4102. Notice regarding return of voted ballot. 

(a)  The elections official may include in the mailings set forth in Section 4101  a printed notice to 
the voters informing the voters that they may return the voted ballot by certified or registered 
mail. This subdivision shall remain in effect until the Election Data Security Commission 
certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for 
statewide use pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(b) The elections official shall include in the mailings setforth in Section 4101 a printed notice to 
voters informing the voters that they may return the voted ballot by certified or registered mail 
or by secure electronic submission and shall include instructions on secure electronic 
submission ofthe vote by mail ballot.  This subdivision shall become effective once the Election 
Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission of 
vote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 10735 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 17035. Special election due to a catastrophe. 

(a) (1) In the case of a special election due to a catastrophe that causes a vacancy in at least 101 
offices of the United States House of Representatives, the county elections official shall, to the 
greatest extent practicable, deliver vote by mail ballots requested pursuant to Chapter 2 
( commencing with Section 3101) of Division 3 not later than 15 days after the date on which the 
Speaker of the United States House ofRepresentatives announces the vacancy. 
(2) In the case of a special election due to a catastrophe that causes a vacancy in at least one­
fourth of the total offices of the United States House of Representatives representing California 
but not a vacancy in at least 101  of the offices of the United States House of Representatives, the 
county elections official shall, to the greatest extent practicable, deliver vote by mail ballots 
requested pursuant to Chapter 2 ( commencing with Section 3101) of Division 3 not later than 15 
days after the date on which the Governor issues the proclamation calling the election to fill the 
vacancy. 
(b) A vote by mail ballot cast pursuant to Chapter 2 ( commencing with Section 3101) of Division 
3 in a special general election conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be postmarked not later 
than the date of the election, shall be received by the county elections official not later than 45 
days after the date on which the elections official transmitted the ballot to the voter, and shall 
comply with all other relevant requirements ofthis code.  A  vote by mail ballot returned by 
secure electronic submission,  once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and 

22 


procedures for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603, shall be returned no 
later than 8:00 pm on the date ofthe election. 
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, any deadlines relating to canvassing, 
announcement of election results, or certification of election results may be extended for a 
reasonable period oftime to facilitate the tabulating and processing of ballots cast pursuant to  · 
Chapter 2 ( commencing with Section 3101) of Division 3. An extension of a deadline pursuant to 
this section must be authorized by the Secretary of State. 

SECTION  7.  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  VOTE  BY  MAIL  BALLOTS  FOR 
MILITARY VOTERS 

Section 3101  ofthe Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3101. Military and Overseas Voters. 

(a) The Secretary of State shall see that this chapter is enforced pursuant to Section 12172.5 of 
the Government Code. 
(b) The Secretary of State shall make available to any person who qualifies as a military or 
overseas voter information regarding voter registration procedures for military or overseas voters 
and procedures for casting ballots by military or overseas voters. 
(c)  The Secretary ofState shall make available to any person who qualifies as a military voter as 
defined in subdivision (b)  ofSection 3 00 information regarding the procedures for secure 
electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots as part ofany pilot program conducted by the 
Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603. After the 
Election Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603, 
the Secretary ofState shall make available to any person who qualifies as military or overseas 
voter information regarding the procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots. 
( ed) The elections official for each district shall ensure that his or her jurisdiction has available a 
system that would allow a military or overseas voter to electronically request and receive a vote 
by mail application, an unvoted ballot, and other information pursuant to this chapter.  The 
elections official for each district shall ensure that secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots is available for all military and overseas voters no later than the riext election held in that 
district not less than 120 days after the Election Data Security Commission certifies software 
and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide 
pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(de) The Secretary of State shall develop standardized military or overseas voter voting materials 
as required by this chapter.  The materials developed pursuant to this subdivision shall contain 
information about the procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots no 
later than the next regularly scheduled statewide election held not less than 120 days after the 
Election Data Security Commission certifies the software and procedures for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots for statewide use pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(e) The Secretary of State shall prescribe the form and content of a declaration for use by a 
military or overseas voter to swear or affirm specific representations pertaining to the voter's 

23 


identity, eligibility to vote, and status as a military or overseas voter, and shall further prescribe 
requirements for the timely and proper completion of a military or overseas voter's ballot. The 
declaration shall be based on the declaration prescribed to accompany a federal write-in absentee 
ballot, as modified to be consistent with this chapter. The elections official for each jurisdiction 
shall ensure that a form for the execution of the declaration, including an indication of the date of 
execution of the declaration, is a prominent part of all balloting materials for which the 
declaration is required. 

Section 3201  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3102. Military and overseas voter rights. 

(a) Any voter who qualifies as a military or overseas voter pursuant to subdivision (bd) of 
Section 300 shall have the right to register for,  and to vote by a vote by mail ballot in, any 
election within the state, including any general, special, or primary election for any federal or 
statewide office or state ballot measure that is voted on statewide. Any voter who qualifies as a 
military or overseas voter pursuant to subdivision (bd) of Section 300 shall also have the right to 
register for,  and to vote by a vote by mail ballot in, any other election for any office or ballot 
measure held in the precinct in which he or she was a resident when he or she was last living 
within the territorial limits of the United States or the District of Columbia, or, for a military or 
overseas voter qualified pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 3 21, in any 
precinct of the state in which his or her parent or legal guardian resided when the parent or legal 
guardian last lived within the territorial limits of the United States or the District of Columbia. 
(b) Any voter who qualifies as a military voter as defined in subdivision (b)  ofSection 300 shall 
have the right to participate in any pilot program conducted by the Election Data Security 
Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 in the county where the military voter is 
registered to vote. 
(c) Any voter who qualifies as a military or overseas voter pursuant to subdivision (d)  ofSection 
300 shall have the right to electronically submit a vote by mail ballot no later than the next 
regu1arly scheduled statewide election held not less than 120 days after the Election Data 
Security Commission certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote 
by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(d)When a military or overseas voter applies for a vote by mail ballot, the application shall be 
deemed to be an affidavit of registration and an application for permanent vote by mail status, 
pursuant to Chapter 3 ( commencing with Section 3200). The application shall be completed by 
the voter and shall contain the voter's name; the voter's date ofbirth; the address ofthe voter's 
residence in the state when the voter was last living within the territorial limits of the United 
States or the District of Columbia or, if qualified as a military or overseas voter pursuant to 
paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 321, the address ofthe voter's parent or legal 
guardian when the parent or legal guardian was last living within the territorial limits of the 
United States or the District of Columbia; the address to which the ballot is to be sent; the voter's 
political party preference or a statement that the voter declines to disclose a political party 
preference; and the voter's signature. 
(ee) If an elections official receives a completed federal postcard application from a person 
qualified as a military or overseas voter, the application shall be deemed to be an affidavit of 

24 


registration, an application for a vote by mail ballot, and an application for permanent vote by 
mail status, pursuant to Chapter 3 ( commencing with Section 3200). 
(d.f) Ifthe applicant is not a resident of the county to which he or she has applied, the elections 
official receiving an application ·from a military or overseas voter shall forward it immediately to 
the county in which the applicant resided when he or she was last living within the territorial 
limits of the United States or the District of Columbia or, for a military or overseas voter 
qualified pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 321, to the county in which his 
or her parent or legal guardian resided when the parent or legal guardian last lived within the 
territorial limits of the United States or the District of Columbia. 
(eg) An application made pursuant to this section shall be received by the elections official 
having jurisdiction over the election no later than seven days prior to the date of the election if 
the application is made solely as an application for a vote by mail ballot. An application made 
pursuant to this section and deemed to be an affidavit of registration shall be effective only if it is 
postmarked on or before the 15th day prior to the election. 

Section 3106 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3106. Facsimile transmission of ballot. 

(a) A military or overseas voter who is living outside of the territorial limits of the United States 
or the District of Columbia, or is called for military service within the United States on or after 
the  final  date  to  make  application  for  a  vote  by mail  ballot,  may return  his  or  her ballot by 
facsimile  transmission.  To  be  counted,  the  ballot  returned  by facsimile  transmission  shall  be 
received by the voter's elections official no later than the closing of the polls on election day and 
shall be accompanied by an identification envelope containing all of the information required by 
Section 3011  and an oath of voter declaration in substantially the following form: 
"OATH OF VOTER 

I,, acknowledge that by returning my voted 

ballot by facsimile transmission I have waived my right to have my ballot 

kept secret. Nevertheless, I understand that, as with any vote by mail 

voter, my signature, whether on this oath of voter form or my identification 

envelope, will be permanently separated from my voted ballot to maintain 

its secrecy at the outset of the tabulation process and thereafter. 

My residence  address  (last  U.S.  residence  for  voter  qualification  purposes)  is(Street  Address) 
____ (City) 

(ZIP Code). 

My current mailing address is(Street Address) __ (City) ___ _ (ZIP Code). 

25 


email 

My 
number is 

- - - - - - - -

address 

is 

My 

facsimile 

transmission 

resident  of 

I  am  a 
as  an  elector  pursuant 
the  Elections  Code  and  I  have  not  applied,  nor 
mail ballot from any other jurisdiction for the same election. 

County,  State  of  California,  or  am  qualified 
(b)  of  Section  321  of 
to  apply,  for  a  vote  by 

(2)  of  subdivision 
intend 

to  paragraph 

I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the foregoing is 
true and correct. 

Dated this ____ day of ___, 20 __. 

(Signature) 

(voter)(power of attorney cannot be accepted) 

YOUR  BALLOT  CANNOT  BE  COUNTED  UNLESS  YOU 
AND 
ABOVE 
OATH 
IDENTIFICATION 
ENVELOPE, 
BY FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION." 

OF  WHICH 

IT  WITH 

INCLUDE 

YOUR 

ARE 

ALL 

SIGN 
BALLOT 

THE 
AND 
RETURNED 

(b) Notwithstanding the voter's waiver of the right to  a secret ballot, each elections official shall 
adopt appropriate procedures .to protect the secrecy of ballots returned by facsimile transmission. 
(c) Upon  receipt  of a  ballot  returned  by  facsimile  transmission,  the  elections  official  shall 
determine the  voter's  eligibility to  vote  by comparing the  signature  on the  return  infonnation 
with  the  signature  on  the  voter's  affidavit  of  registration  or  any  signature  permitted  for 
comparison  under  Section  3019.  The  ballot  shall  be  duplicated  and  all  materials  preserved 
according to procedures set forth in this code. 
(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a military or overseas voter who is permitted to return his or 
her ballot by facsimile transmission is, nonetheless, encouraged to return his or her ballot by mail 
or  in  person  if possible.  A  military  or  overseas  voter  should  return  a  ballot  by  facsimile 
transmission only if doing so  is necessary for the ballot to be received before the close of polls 
on election day. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  a military voter as defined in subdivision (b)  ofSection 300 
is eligible to participate in any pilot program conducted by the Election Data Security 
Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 in the county where the military voter is 
registered to vote and shall not be required to sign any oath waiving his or her right to a secret 
ballot in order to participate in the pilot program. 
(f)This section is repealed as ofthe date the Election Data Security Commission certifies 
software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use 

26 


statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. At that time,  a military or overseas voter 
shall be permitted to return a vote by mail ballot in person,  by mail,  or by secure electronic 
submission. 

Section 3111  ofthe Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3111. Military or overseas ¥eteF voter recalled to service. 

(a)  If a military or overseas voter is unable to appear at his or her polling place because of being 
recalled to service after the final day for making application for a vote by mail ballot, but before 
5 p.m. on the day before the day of election, he or she may appear before the elections official in 
the county in which the military or overseas voter is registered or, if within the state, in the 
county in which he or she is recalled to service and make application for a vote by mail ballot, 
which maybe submitted by facsimile,  or by electronic mail or online transmission if the 
elections official makes the transmission option available. The elections official shall deliver to 
him or her a vote by mail ballot which may be voted in the elections official's office or voted 
outside the elections official's office on or before the close of the polls on the day of election and 
returned as are other vote by mail ballots. To be counted, the ballot shall be returned to the 
elections official's office in person, by facsimile transmission, or by an authorized person on or 
before the close of the polls on the day of the election. Ifthe military or overseas voter appears in 
the county in which he or she is recalled to service, rather than the county to which he or she is 
registered, the elections official shall coordinate with the elections official in the county in which 
the military or overseas voter is registered to provide the ballot that contains the appropriate 
measures and races for the precinct in which the military or overseas voter is registered. 
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  a military voter as defined in subdivision (b)  ofSection 300 
is eligible to participate in any pilot program conducted by the Election Data Security 
Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 in the county where the military voter is 
registered to  vote. A military voter participating in such a pilot program is permitted to return a 
vote by mail ballot by secure electronic submission. 
(c)  Ifa military voter is already approved to vote by mail,  or could reasonably be established as 
a vote by mail voter,  in his or her home county prior to election day,  the election official shall, 
upon demand,  issue to the military voter a vote by mail ballot that may be returned by secure 
electronic submission.  Upon request,  the elections official shall send the vote by mail ballot to 
the military voter either by mail, facsimile,  or electronic transmission,  as requested by the 
military voter.  This subdivision shall take effect not less than 120 days after the date the Election 
Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission of 
vote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 3113  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 3113. Acts of Congress shall control. 

Ifby any act of Congress which is now or may become effective during the effective period of 
this section, provision is made for voting by military or overseas voters, that act shall control and 

27 


be superior to any conflicting provisions of this code, and all state, county, municipal, and 
district officers who are charged with the performance of duties with reference to the election 
laws of this state shall perform the duties and discharge the obligations placed upon them by that 
act of Congress. It is the purpose and intent of this section that full effect shall be given to ballots 
cast by military or overseas voters under federal statutes in order that no person shall be deprived 
of his or her vote by virtue of having cast his· or her ballot under any federal statute rather than 
under the laws of this state. Provided,  however, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to 
prohibit the secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots by military or overseas voters 
by virtue ofthe fact that Congress has not yet authorized electronic submission ofballots. 

SECTION 8.  ALL MAIL BALLOT ELECTIONS 

Section 4005 is hereby added to the Elections Code,  to read as follows: 

§ 4005. 
(a) Notwithstanding Section 4000 or any other law,  on or after January 1,  2018,  a county may 
conduct any election as an all-mailed ballot election ifall ofthe following apply: 
(1)  (A) At least two ballot dropoff locations are provided within the jurisdiction where the 
election is held or the number ofballot dropoff locations are fixed in a manner so that there is at 
least one ballot dropoff location provided for every 15, 000 registered voters within the 
jurisdiction where the election is held,  as determined on the 88th day before the day ofthe 
election, whichever results in more ballot dropoff locations. 
(B) A ballot dropoff location provided for under this section consists ofa secure,  accessible,  and 
locked ballot box able to receive voted ballots. All ballot dropoff locations shall be open at least 
during regular business hours beginning not less than 28 days before the date ofthe election, 
and on the date ofthe election. At least one ballot dropofflocation shall be an accessible, 
secured,  exterior drop box that is available for a minimum of12 hours per day including regular 
business hours. 
(2)  The county elections official permits a voter residing in the county to do  any ofthe following 
at a vote center: 
(A)  Return,  or vote and return,  his or her vote by mail ballot. 
(B) Register to vote,  update his or her voter registration,  and vote pursuant to Section 2170. 
(C) Receive and vote a provisional ballot pursuant to Section 3016 or Article 5 (commencing 
with Section 14310) ofChapter 3 ofDivision 14. 
(D) Receive a replacement ballot upon verification that a ballot for the same election has not 
been received from the voter by the county elections official. Ifthe county elections official is 
unable to determine ifa ballot for the same election has been received from the voter,  the county 
elections official may issue a provisional ballot. 
(E)  Vote a regular, provisional,  or replacement ballot using accessible voting equipment that 
provides for a private and independent voting experience. 
(3)  (A)  On the day ofthe election,from 7 a.m.  to 8 p.m.,  at least one vote center is provided for 
every 15, 000 registered voters within the jurisdiction where the election is held,  as determined 
on the 88th day before the day ofthe election. 
(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A),for a jurisdiction with fewer than 30,000 registered 
voters,  a minimum oftwo vote centers are provided on the day ofthe election within the 
jurisdiction where the election is held. 

28 


(4)  (A)  Not less than 10 days before the day ofthe election, for a minimum ofeight hours per 

day,  at least one vote center is provided for every 30,000 registered voters within the jurisdiction 

where the election is held,  as determined on the 88th day before the day ofthe election. 

(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A),for a jurisdiction with fewer than 30,000 registered 

voters,  a minimum oftwo vote centers are provided within the jurisdiction where the election is 

held. 

(C)  The vote centers provided under this section are established in accordance with the 

accessibility requirements described in Article 5 (commencing with Section 12280) ofChapter 3 

ofDivision 12,  the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of1990 (42  US.C.  Sec.  12101 et 

seq.),  the federal Help America Vote Act of2002 (52  US.C.  Sec.  20901 et seq.),  and the federal 

Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US.C.  Sec.  10101 et seq.). 

(D)  The vote centers provided under this section are established at accessible locations as near 

as possible to established public transportation routes.  The vote centers shall be equipped with 

voting units or systems that are accessible to individuals with disabilities and that provide the 

same opportunity for access and participation as is provided to voters who are not disabled, 

including the ability to vote privately and independently in accordance with Sections 12280 and 

19240. 

(E)  (i)  Vote centers provided under this section have an electronic mechanism for the county 

elections official to  immediately access,  at a minimum,  all ofthe following voter registration 

data: 

(!)Name. 

(II) Address. 

(III) Date ofbirth. 

(IV) Language preference. 

(VJ  Party preference. 

(VI) Precinct. 

(VII)  Whether or not the voter has been issued a vote by mail ballot and whether or not a ballot 

has been received by the county elections official. 

(ii)  The electronic mechanism used to  access voter registration data shall not be connected in 

any way to a voting system. 

(5) A method is available to request and deliver a blank vote by mail ballot and,  ifa replacement 

ballot is necessary,  a blank replacement ballot that voters with disabilities can markprivately 

and independently. 

(6)  (A)  Except as otherwise provided for in this section,  election boards for the vote centers 

established under this section meet the requirements for eligibility and composition pursuant to 

Article 1 (commencing with Section 12300) ofChapter 4 ofDivision 12. 

(B) Each vote center provides language assistance in all languages required in the jurisdiction 

under subdivision (c)  ofSection 12303 or Section 203 ofthe federal Voting Rights Act of1965 

(52  US. C.  Sec.  10101 et seq.) in a manner that enables voters ofthe applicable language 

minority groups to participate effectively in the electoral process. Each vote center shall post 

information regarding the availability oflanguage assistance in English and all other languages 

for which language assistance is required to  be provided in the jurisdiction under subdivision (c) 

ofSection 12303 or Section 203 ofthe federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US.C.  Sec.  10101 

et seq.). 

(i) Ifa vote center is located in,  or adjacent to,  a precinct, census tract,  or other defined 

geographical subsection required to establish language requirements under subdivision (c)  of 


29 


Section 12303 or Section 203 ofthe federal  Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US.C.  Sec.  10101 et 
seq.),  or ifit is identified as needing language assistance through the public input process 
described in clause (ii),  the county elections official shall ensure that the vote center is staffed by 
election board members who speak the required language. Ifthe county elections official is 
unable to  recruit election board members who speak the required language,  alternative methods 
ofeffective language assistance shall be provided by the county elections official. 
(ii)  The  county elections official shall solicit public input regarding which vote centers should be 
staffed by election board members who are fluent in a language in addition to English pursuant 
to subdivision (c)  ofSection 12303 and Section 203 ofthe federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52 
US.C.  Sec.  10101  et seq.). 
(iii)  The county elections official shall provide notice in the sample ballot,  in vote by mail 
materials, and on his or her Internet Web site ofthe specific language services available at each 
vote center. 
(CJ  Each vote center provides election materials translated in all languages required in the 
jurisdiction under subdivision (c)  ofSection 14201 and Section 203 ofthe federal Voting Rights 
Actofl965 (52  US.C.  Sec.10101 et seq.). 
(D)  Each vote center provides reasonable modifications and auxiliary aids and services as 
required by the federal American with Disabilities Act (42  US.C.  Sec.  12101 et seq.). 
(7)  (A) At least 29 days before the date ofthe election,  the county elections official mails to  each 
registered voter a vote by mail ballot packet that includes a return envelope with instructions for 
the use and return ofthe vote by mail ballot. Instructions sent pursuant to  this subparagraph 
shall include instructions on secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots once the 
Electronic Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for use statewide 
pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(BJ  The  county elections official delivers to  each voter,  with either the sample ballot sent 
pursuant to Section 13303 or with the vote by mail ballot packet,  all ofthe following: 
(i) A notice,  translated in all languages required under subdivision (c)  ofSection 14201 and 
Section 203 ofthe federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US.C.  Sec.  10101 et seq.),  that informs 
voters ofall ofthe following: 
(I) An all-mailed ballot election is being conducted and each eligible voter will be issued a vote 
by mail ballot by mail. 
(II)  The  voter may cast a vote by mail ballot in person at a vote center during the times and days 
specified in subparagraph (A)  ofparagraph (4)  or on election day. 
(III)  The voter may return the ballot by secure electronic submission.  This subparagraph shall be 
in effect once the Electronic Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(IV) At least seven days before the date ofthe election,  the voter may request the county elections 
official to send a vote by mail ballot in a language other than English pursuant to Section 203 of 
the federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US. C.  Sec.  1 OJ OJ  et seq.) or a facsimile copy ofthe 
ballot printed in a language other than English pursuant to Section 14201. 
(ii) A  list ofthe ballot dropofflocations and vote centers established pursuant to  this section, 
including the dates and hours they are open.  The list shall also be posted in an accessible format 
on the Internet Web site ofthe county elections official. 
(iii) A postage-paid postcard that the voter may return to  the county elections official for the 
purpose ofrequesting a vote by mail ballot in a language other than English. 

30 


, 

(CJ  Upon request,  the county elections official provides written voting materials to voters with 
disabilities in an accessible format. 
(8)  (A)  The  county elections official develops a draft plan for the administration ofelections 
conducted pursuant to  this section in  consultation with the public,  including both ofthe 
following: 
(i)  One meeting, publicly noticed at least 10 days in advance ofthe meeting,  that includes 
representatives,  advocates,  and other stakeholders representing each community for which the 
county is required to provide voting materials and assistance in a language other than English 
under subdivision (c)  ofSection 14201 and the federal  Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US.C.  Sec. 
10101 et seq.). 
(ii)  One meeting, publicly noticed at least 10 days in advance ofthe meeting,  that includes 
representatives from the disability community and community organizations and individuals that 
advocate on behalfof or provide services to,  individuals with disabilities. 
(BJ  The county elections official,  when developing the draft plan for the administration of 
elections conducted pursuant to  this section,  considers,  at a minimum,  all ofthe following: 
(i)  Vote center and ballot dropoff location proximity to public transportation. 
(ii)  Vote  center and ballot dropoff location proximity to  communities with historically low vote 
by mail usage. 
(iii)  Vote  center and ballot dropoff location proximity to population centers. 
(iv)  Vote center and ballot dropoff location proximity to  language minority communities. 
(v)  Vote  center and ballot dropoff location proximity to  voters with disabilities. 
(vi) Access to accessible and free parking at vote centers and ballot dropoff locations. 
(vii)  The distance and time a voter must travel by car or public transportation to  a vote center 
and ballot dropofflocation. 
(viii)  The availability ofalternate methods for voters with disabilities for whom vote by mail 
ballot are not accessible to cast a ballot,  including secure electronic submission once the 
Electronic Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for' use statewide 
pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(ix)  Traffic patterns near vote centers and ballot dropoff locations. 
(x)  The availability ofmobile vote centers in addition to  the number ofvote centers established 
pursuant to  this section. 
(CJ  The  county elections official publicly notices the draft plan for the administration ofelections 
conducted pursuant to  this section and accepts public comments on the draft plan for at least 14 
days before the hearing held pursuant to subparagraph (DJ. 
(DJ  (i)  Following the 14-day review period required by subparagraph (CJ,  the county elections 
official holds a public meeting to  consider the draft plan for the administration ofelections 
conducted pursuant to  this section and to accept public comment.  The meeting shall be publicly 
noticed at least 10 days in advance ofthe meeting on the Internet Web sites ofthe clerk ofthe 
county board ofsupervisors and the county elections official,  or,  ifneither the clerk ofthe county 
board ofsupervisors nor the county elections official maintain an Internet Web site,  in the office 
ofthe county elections official. 
(ii) After the public hearing to consider the draft plan for the administration ofelections 
conducted pursuant to  this section and to  accept public comments,  the county elections official 
may amend the draft plan.  The county elections official shall publicly notice the amended draft 
plan and shall accept public comments on the amended draft plan for at least 14 days before the 
county elections official may adopt the amended draft plan pursuant to  subparagraph (E). 

31 


(E)  Following the 14-day review and commentperiod required by clause (ii)  ofsubparagraph 
(D),  the county elections may adopt a final plan for the administration ofelections conducted 
pursuant to  this section. 
(F) Public meetings held pursuant to this paragraph shall,  upon request, provide auxiliary aids 
and services to ensure effective communication with people with disabilities. 
(G)  Within two years ofthe adoption ofthe first plan for the administration ofelections 
conducted pursuant to this section,  the county elections official shall hold public meetings in 
accordance with the procedures described in subparagraphs (C)  to  (F),  inclusive,  to consider 
revising the first plan for the administration ofelections conducted pursuant to  this section. 
Every four years thereafter,  the county elections official shall hold public meetings in 
accordance with the procedures described in subparagraphs (C)  to  (F),  inclusive,  to consider 
revising the plan for the administration ofelections conducted pursuant to  this section. 
(HJ  (i)  With reasonable public notification,  a county elections official may amend a plan for the 
administration ofelections conducted pursuant to this section no more than 120 days before the 
date ofan election held pursuant to this section. 
(ii)  With reasonable public notification,  a county elections official may amend a plan for the 
administration ofelections conducted pursuant to  this section more than 120 days before the 
date ofan election held pursuant to this section ifhe or she provides at least 30 days to accept 
public comment on the amended plan. 
(!) The plan for the administration ofelections conducted pursuant to  this section,  includes all of 
the following: 
(i) A  description ofhow the county elections official will use the media,  including social media, 
newspapers, radio,  and television that serve language minority communities for purposes of 
informing voters ofthe upcoming election and promoting the toll-free voter assistance hotline. 
(ii) A description ofhow the county elections official will have a community presence to educate 
voters regarding the provisions ofthis section. 
(iii) A  description ofthe accessible information that will be publicly available on the accessible 
Internet Web site ofthe county elections official. 
(iv) A description ofhow the county elections official wilt educate and communicate the 
provisions ofthis section to the public, including: 
(!)  Communities for which the county is required to provide voting materials and assistance in a 
language other than English under subdivision (c)  ofSection 14201 and the federal Voting 
Rights Act of1965 (52  U.S.C.  Sec.  10101 et seq.). 
(II)  The disability community,  including organizations and individuals that advocate on behalf 
of, or provide services to,  individuals with disabilities. 
(v) A description ofhow a voter with disabilities may request and receive a blank vote by mail 
ballot and,  ifa replacement ballot is necessary,  a blank replacement ballot that voters with 
disabilities can markprivately and independently. 
(vi) A description ofhow the county elections official will address significant disparities in voter 
accessibility andparticipation identified in the reports required by subdivision (j). 
(vii)  To  the extent available at the time ofpublication, information on all ofthe following: 
(!)  The total number ofvote centers to be established. 
(11)  The total number ofballot dropofflocations ta be established. 
(111)  The location ofeach vote center. 
(IV)  The location ofeach ballot dropoff location and whether it is inside or outside. 
(V) A  map ofthe locations ofeach vote center and ballot dropofflocation. 

32 


(VJ)  The  hours ofoperation for each vote center. 
(VII)  The hours ofoperation for each ballot dropofflocation. 
(VIII)  The security and contingency plans that would be implemented by the county elections 

official to do both ofthe following: 

(ia) Prevent a disruption ofthe vote center process. 

(ib) Ensure that the election is properly conducted ifa disruption occurs. 

(IX)  The number ofelection board members and the number ofbilingual election board members 

and the languages spoken. 

(X)  The type and number ofaccessible voting machines and related accessible services at each 

vote center. 

(XI)  The design,  layout,  and placement ofequipment inside each voter center that protects each 

voter's right to  cast a private ballot. 

(viii) A  toll-free voter assistance hotline maintained by the county elections official that is 

operational no later than 29 days before the date ofthe election until 5 p.m.  on the day after the 

election.  The  toll-free voter assistance hotline shall provide assistance to voters in all languages 

in which the county is required to provide voting materials and assistance under subdivision (c) 

ofSection 14201 and the federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  USC Sec.  10101 et seq.). 

(ix) At least one public service announcement in the media,  including newspapers,  radio,  and 

television,  that serve English-speaking citizens for purposes ofinforming voters ofthe upcoming 

election and promoting the toll-free voter assistance hotline. 

(x) At least one public service announcement in the media,  including newspapers,  radio,  and 

television,  that serve non-English-speaking citizens for each language in which the county is 

required to provide voting materials and assistance under subdivision (c)  ofSection 14201 and 

the federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US. C.  Sec.  10101 et seq.) for purposes ofinforming 

voters ofthe upcoming election and promoting the toll-free voter assistance hotline. 

(J)  The plan for the administration ofelections conduct pursuant to this section is posted in a 

format that is accessible to persons with disabilities on the Internet Web site ofthe Secretary of 

State and on the Internet Web site ofthe county elections official. 

(b)  Notwithstanding Section 4002 or any other law,  on or after January 1,  2018,  a county 

elections official may conduct a special election as an all-mailed ballot election under this 

section ifall ofthe following apply: 

(1)  (A)  On the day ofelection, from  7 a.m.  to  8 p.m.,  at least one vote center is providedfor every 

30, 000 registered voters.  The county elections official shall make a reasonable effort to establish 

a vote center within the jurisdiction where the special election is held. 

(B)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), for a jurisdiction with fewer than 30, 000 registered 

voters,  the county elections official makes a reasonable effort to establish a vote center. 

(2)  (A) Not less than 10 days before the day ofthe election, for a minimum ofeight hours per 

day,  at least one vote center is providedfor every 60, 000 registered voters.  The county elections 

official shall make a reasonable effort to establish a vote center within the jurisdiction where the 

special election is held. 

(B)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), for a jurisdiction with fewer than 30, 000 registered 

voters,  the county elections official makes a reasonable effort to  establish a vote center. 

(3)  (A) At least one ballot dropofflocation is providedfor every 15, 000 registered voters. At 

least one ballot dropofflocation shall be located within the jurisdiction where the special 

election is held.  All ballot dropoff locations shall be open at least during regular business hours 

beginning not less than 28 days before the date ofthe election,  and on the date ofthe election. 


33 


(B)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), for a jurisdiction with fewer than 15, 000 registered 
voters,  at least one ballot dropofflocation shall be provided. 
(c) Except as otherwise provided in this section,  the election day procedures shall be conducted 
in accordance with Division 14 (commencing with Section 14000). 
(d)  The county elections official may provide,  at his or her discretion,  additional ballot dropoff 
locations and vote centers for purposes ofthis section. 
(e)  The return ofvoted vote by mail ballots is subject to Sections 3017 and 3020. 
(I) For the sole purpose ofreporting the results ofan election conducted pursuant to this section, 
upon completion ofthe ballot count,  the county elections official shall divide the jurisdiction into 
precincts pursuant to Article 2  (commencing with Section 12220) ofChapter 3 ofDivision 12 
and shall prepare a statement ofthe results ofthe election in accordance with Sections 15 3 73 
and 15374. 
(g)  (1)  (A) Ifan election is conducted pursuant to this section,  the Secretary ofState shall report 
to the Legislature regarding the success ofthe first election conducted pursuant to  this section, 
including,  to the extent possible,  the turnout ofdifferent populations,  including the population 
categories ofrace,  ethnicity,  language preference,  age,  gender,  disability, permanent vote by 
mail status,  and political party affiliation as it relates to the languages required under the 
federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  US.C.  Sec.  10101 et seq.). 
(B) Ifan election is conducted pursuant to  this section,  the county shall submit to the Legislature 
and to  the Secretary ofState a report that includes all ofthe following: 
(i)  Information on the cost to conduct the election. 
(ii)  The number ofballots that were not counted and the reasons they were not counted. 
(iii)  Voter fraud. 
(iv) Any other problems that became known to  the county during the election or canvass. 
(v)  The number ofvotes cast at each vote center. 
(2)  Whenever possible,  using the criteria setforth in paragraph (1),  the reports shall compare 
the election conducted pursuant to this section to similar elections not conducted pursuant to this 
section in the same jurisdiction or comparable jurisdictions. 
(3)  Within six months after the date ofthe election or before the date ofa subsequent election 
conducted pursuant to this section,  whichever is sooner,  the Secretary ofState and counties shall 
do all ofthe following with respect to the reports required by this subdivision: 
(A)  Submit the reports to the Legislature in compliance with Section 9795 ofthe Government 
Code. 
(B)  Post the reports in a format that is accessible to  voters with disabilities on the Internet Web 
site ofthe Secretary ofState or the county elections official,  as applicable. 
(h)  The Secretary ofState shall enforce the provisions ofthis section pursuant to Section 12172.5 
ofthe Government Code. 
(i) For purposes ofthis section,  "disability" has the same meaning as defined in subdivisions (j), 
(m),  and (n)  ofSection 12926 ofthe Government Code. 
(j)Jf this Section is enacted by the Legislature and signed by the Governor before this initiative is 
approved by a majority ofthe voters ofthe State ofCalifornia,  that language shall remain in 
effect to  the extent it is consistent with andfurthers the purpose ofthis initiative measure. Ifthat 
language is inconsistent with this initiative measure,  the language herein shall remain in effect 
and control. 

34 


Section 4005.5 is hereby added to the Elections Code,  to  read as follows: 

§4005.5. 
(a)  The  Secretary  of State  shall establish  a  tasliforce  that includes representatives  of all of the 
following: 
(1)  County elections officials. 
(2)  Individuals  with  demonstrated  language  accessibility  experience  for  languages  covered 
under the federal Voting Rights Act of1965 (52  USC Sec.  10101 et seq.). 
(3)  The  disability  community  and  community  organizations  and  individuals  that  advocate  on 
behalfof, or provide services to,  individuals with disabilities. 
(4)  Experts with demonstrated experience in the.field ofelections. 
(b)  The  tasliforce  shall  review  elections  conducted  pursuant  to  Section  4005  and  provide 
comments and recommendations to the Legislature on or before April 1,  2021. 
(c)  This section shall remain in effect only until January  1,  2022,  and as ofthat date is repealed, 
unless  a  later  enacted statute,  that  is  enacted before January  1,  2022,  deletes  or extends  that 
date. 
(d)  lf this Section is enacted by the Legislature and signed by the  Governor before this  initiative 
is  approved by a majority of the voters of the  State  of California,  that language shall remain in 
effect to  the extent it is  consistent with and furthers  the purpose ofthis initiative measure. lf that 
language  is  inconsistent with  this  initiative  measure,  the  language  herein shall remain  in  effect 
and control. 

SECTION 9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 2270 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§2270 

The Secretary of State shall adopt regulations to implement this chapter, including regulations 
addressing both of the following: 
(a) A process for canceling the registration of a person who is ineligible to vote, but became 
registered under the California New Motor Voter Program in the absence of any violation by that 
person of Section 18100. 
(b) An education and outreach campaign informing voters about the California New Motor Voter 
Program that the Secretary of State will conduct to implement this chapter. The Secretary may 
use any public and private funds available for this and shall provide materials created for this 
outreach and education campaign in languages other than English, as required by the federal 
Voting Rights Act of 1965 (52 U.S.C.  Sec.  10503). This education and outreach campaign shall 
include information about secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots once the 
Electronic Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for use statewide 
pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofsection 2603. 

35 


Section 9082.7 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§9082.7. State ballot pamphlet on internet. 

(a) The  Secretary  of State  shall  make  available  the  complete  state  ballot  pamphlet  over  the 
Internet. The online version of the state ballot pamphlet shall contain all of the following: 
(1) For  each  candidate  listed  in  the  pamphlet,  a  means  to  access  campaign  contribution 
disclosure reports for the candidate that are available online. 
(2) For  each  state  ballot  measure  listed  in  the  pamphlet,  a  means  to  access  the  consolidated 
information specified in subdivision (b ). 
(b) The Secretary of State shall create an Internet Web  site,  or use other available technology, to 
consolidate  infonnation  about  each  state  ballot measure  in  a  manner  that  is  easy  for  voters  to 
access and understand. The infonnation shall include all of the following: 
(1) A summary of the ballot measure's content. 
(2) The total  amount of reported  contributions  made in support of and  opposition to  the  ballot 
measure, calculated and updated as follows: 
(A) (i) The total  amount of contributions in support of the ballot measure  shall he calculated by 
adding  together  the  total  amounts  of contributions  made  in  support  of the  ballot  measure  and 
reported  in  semiannual  statements  required  by  Section  84200  of  the  Govenunent  Code, 
preelection  statements  required  by  Section  84200.5  of  the  Govenunent  Code,  campaign 
statements required by Section  84202.3  of the  Government Code,  and  late  contribution reports 
required  by  Section  84203  of the  Govenunent  Code  that  are  reported  within  16  days  of the 
election at which the measure will appear on the ballot. 
(ii) The total  amount of contributions in opposition to  the ballot measure shall be calculated by 
adding together the total  amounts  of contributions made in opposition to  the ballot measure and 
reported  in  semiannual  statements  required  by  Section  84200  of  the  Government  Code, 
preelection  statements  required  by  Section  84200.5  of  the  Government  Code,  campaign 
statements required by Section 84202.3  of the  Govenunent Code,  and  late  contribution reports 
required  by  Section  84203  of the  Government  Code  that  are  reported  within  16  days  of the 
election at which the measure will appear on the ballot. 
(iii) For  purposes  of determining  the  total  amount  of reported  contributions  pursuant  to  this 
subparagraph,  the  Secretary of State  shall,  to  the extent practicable with respect to  committees 
primarily fonned to support or oppose a ballot measure, do both of the following: 
(I) Ensure that transfers of funds between primarily formed committees are not counted twice. 
(II) Treat  a  contribution made to  a primarily fonned  conunittee that  supports  or  opposes  more 
than one state ballot measure as  if the total  amount of that contribution was made for  each state 
ballot measure that the committee supports or opposes. 
(B) The  total  amount  of reported  contributions  calculated  under  this  paragraph  for  each  state 
ballot measure  shall  be updated not later than  five  business  days  after receipt  of a  semiannual 
statement,  campaign  statement,  or  preelection  statement  and  not  later  than  two  business  days 
after receipt of a late contribution report within 16 days of the election at which the measure will 
appear on the ballot. 
(C) The  total  amount  of reported  contributions  calculated  under  this  paragraph  for  each  state 
ballot  measure  shall  be  accompanied  by  an  explanation  that  the  contribution  totals  may  be 
overstated due to the inclusion of contributions made to  committees supporting or opposing more 
than one state ballot measure, as required by subclause (II) of clause (iii) of subparagraph (A). 

36 


(3) A  current  list  of the  top  10  contributors  supporting  and  opposing  the  ballot  measure,  if 
compiled  by  the  Fair  Political  Practices  Commission  pursuant  to  subdivision  ( e)  of Section 
84223 of the Government Code. 
(4) (A) A  list  of each  committee primarily formed  to  support  or oppose the ballot measure,  as 
described in Section 82047.5 of the Government Code, and a means to  access information about 
the sources of funding reported for each committee. 
(B) Information about the sources of contributions shall be updated as new information becomes 
available to  the public pursuant to  the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Title 9 (commencing with 
Section 81000) of the Government Code). 
(C) If a  committee identified in subparagraph (A)  receives  one million dollars  ($1,000,000)  or 
more  in  contributions  for  an  election,  the  Secretary of State  shall  provide  a  means  to  access 
online  information  about  the  committee's  top  10  contributors  reported  to  the  Fair  Political 
Practices Commission pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 84223 of the Government Code. 
(D) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of subdivision ( c) of Section 84223  of the Government Code, 
the  Fair  Political  Practices  Commission  shall  automatically  provide  any  list  of  top  10 
contributors  created  pursuant  to  Section  84223  of the  Government  Code,  and  any  subsequent 
updates to that list, to the Secretary of State for purposes of compliance with this section. 
(5) Any other information deemed relevant by the Secretary of State. 
(c)  The online version ofthe state ballot pamphlet shall include a notice to voters informing the 
voters that vote by mail ballots may be returned in person,  by certified or registered mail,  or by 
secure electronic submission and shall include instructions on secure electronic submission of 
the vote by mail ballot.  This notice is only required once the Election Data Security Commission 
certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 9084 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 9084. Form of ballot pamphlet. 

The ballot pamphlet shall contain all of the following: 
(a) A complete copy of each state measure. 
(b) A  copy of the  specific  constitutional  or statutory provision,  if any,  that  each  state measure 
would repeal or revise. 
(c) A copy of the arguments and rebuttals for and against each state measure. 
(d) A copy of the analysis of each state measure. 
(e) Tables of contents, indexes, art work, graphics, and other materials that the Secretary of State 
determines  will  make  the ballot  pamphlet  easier to  understand  or more  useful  for  the  average 
voter. 
(t) A notice, conspicuously printed on the cover of the ballot pamphlet, indicating that additional 
copies of the ballot pamphlet will be mailed by the county elections official upon request. 
(g) A written explanation of the judicial retention procedure as required by Section 9083. 
(h) The Voter Bill ofRights pursuant to Section 2300. 
(i) If the  ballot  contains  an  election  for  the  office  of United  States  Senator,  information  on 
candidates  for  United  States  Senator.  A  candidate  for  United  States  Senator may purchase the 
space  to  place  a  statement  in the  state  ballot  pamphlet  that  does  not  exceed  250  words.  The 

37 


statement may not make any reference to  any opponent of the candidate.  The statement shall be 
submitted in accordance with timeframes  and procedures  set  forth by the  Secretary of State for 
the preparation of the state ballot pamphlet. 
(j) If the ballot contains a question on the confirmation or retention of a justice of the Supreme 
Court, information on justices of the Supreme Court who are subject to confirmation or retention. 
(k) If the ballot contains an election for the offices of President and Vice President of the United 
States,  a  notice  that refers  voters  to  the  Secretary  of State's  Internet  Web  site  for  information 
about candidates for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States. 
(1) A  written  explanation  of the  appropriate  election  procedures  for  party-nominated,  voter­
nominated, and nonpartisan offices as required by Section 9083.5. 
(m) A  written  explanation  of the  top  10  contributor  lists  required  by  Section  84223  of the 
Government  Code,  including  a  description  of the  Internet  Web  sites  where  those  lists  are 
available to the public. 
(n)  The state ballot pamphlet shall include a notice to voters informing the voters that vote by 
mail ballots may be returned in person,  by certified or registered mail,  or by secure electronic 
submission and shall include instructions on secure electronic submission ofthe vote by mail 
ballot.  This notice is only required once the Election Data Security Commission certifies 
software andprocedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 10704 ofthe Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§  10704.  Special  primary  election;  time;  consolidation;  nomination  papers;  vote  by  mail 
ballot 

(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), a special primary election shall be held in the district in 
which the vacancy occurred on the 9th Tuesday or, if the 9th Tuesday is the day of or the day 
following a state holiday, the 10th Tuesday preceding the day of the special general election at 
which the vacancy is to be filled.  Candidates at the primary election shall be nominated in the 
manner set forth in Chapter 1 ( commencing with Section 8000) of Part 1 of Division 8, except 
that nomination papers shall not be circulated more than 73  days before the primary election, 
shall be left with the county elections official for examination not less than 53  days before the 
primary election, and shall be filed with the Secretary of State not less than 53  days before the 
primary election. 
(b) A  special primary election shall be held in the district in which the vacancy occurred on the 
10th Tuesday preceding the day ofthe special general election at which the vacancy is to be 
filled if both of the following conditions apply: 
(1) The 10th Tuesday preceding the day of the special general election is an established election 
date pursuant to Section 1000. 
(2) A  statewide or local election occurring wholly or partially within the same territory in which 
the vacancy exists is scheduled for the 10th Tuesday preceding the day of the special general 
election. 
(c) An application for a vote by mail ballot for a special election shall be made and processed in 
the manner required by Section 3001. 
(d) The sample ballot for a special election shall contain a written explanation of the election 
procedure for voter-nominated office as specified in subdivision (b) of Section 9083 .5. 

38 


Immediately after the explanation shall be printed the following:  "If one candidate receives more 
than 50% of the votes cast at the special primary election, he or she will be elected to fill the 
vacancy and no special general election will be held." 
(e)  On the ballot for a special election, immediately below the instructions to voters, there shall 
be a box not less than one-half inch high enclosed by a heavy-ruled line the same as the 
borderline. This box shall be as long as there are columns for the ballot and shall be set directly 
above these columns. Within the box shall be printed the words "Voter-Nominated Office." 
Immediately below that phrase within the same box shall be printed the following: 
"All voters, regardless of the party preference they disclosed upon registration, or refusal to 
disclose a party preference, may vote for any candidate for a voter-nominated office. The party 
preference, if any, designated by a candidate is selected by the candidate and is shown for the 
information ofthe voters only. It does not imply that the candidate is nominated or endorsed by 
the party or that the party approves of the candidate." 
(!)The sample ballot for a special election shall include a notice to voters informing the voters 
·	that vote by mail ballots may be returned in person, by certified or registered mail,  or by secure 
electronic submission and shall include instructions on secure electronic submission ofthe vote 
by mail ballot.  This notice is only required once the Election Data Security Commission certifies 
software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 11323 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 11323. Voter shall indicate by voting. 

A voter shall indicate, by using the stamp or other marking device to place a mark in the voting 
space opposite either "Yes" or "No", his vote for or against the recall proposal, respectively. For 
purposes ofthis Section and the return vote by mail ballots in any recall election,  the term 
"marking device" shall include software for the secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots certified for use statewide by the Election Data Security Commission pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 once that certification has occurred. 

Section 11324 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 11324. Recall election sample ballot. 

(a)  The  official  responsible  for  preparing  the  ballot  shall,  at  least  10  days  prior  to  the  recall 
election, mail a sample ballot to  each registered voter of the  electoral jurisdiction of the officer 
sought to be recalled. 
(b)The sample ballot for a recall election shall include a notice to voters informing the voters 
that vote by mail ballots may be returned in person,  by certified or registered mail,  or by secure 
electronic submission and shall include instructions on secure electronic submission ofthe vote 
by mail ballot.  This notice is only required once the Election Data Security Commission certifies 
software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use 
statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

39 

Section 12223 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 12223. Maximum number of voters in a precinct. 

(a) Whenever a jurisdiction is divided into election precincts or whenever the boundary of an 
established precinct is changed or a new precinct is created, the precinct boundary shall be fixed 
in a manner so that the number of voters in the precinct does not exceed 1,000 on the 88th day 
prior to the day of election, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b) An elections official may shall subtract the number of pennanent vote by mail voters, 
pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 3200) of Division 3, from the total number of 
voters for purposes of complying with subdivision (a) if after subtracting the number of 
permanent vote by mail voters, the number of voters in the precinct does not exceed the 
percentage of nonpermanent vote by mail voters in the jurisdiction on the 88th day prior to the 
election multiplied by 1,000, unless otherwise provided by law 

Section 13300 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 13300. Form of sample ballots. 

(a) By at least 29 days before the partisan primary, each county elections official shall prepare a 
separate sample ballot for each political party and a separate sample nonpatiisan ballot. The 
county elections official shall place on each ballot, as applicable, in the order provided in 
Chapter 2 ( commencing with Section 13100), and under the appropriate title of each office, the 
names of all candidates for whom nomination papers have been duly filed with him or her, or 
have been certified to him or her by the Secretary of State, to be voted for in his or her county at 
the partisan primary election. 
(b) The sample ballots shall be identical to the official ballots, except as otherwise provided by 
law. The sample ballots shall be printed on paper of a different texture from the paper to be used 
for the official ballot. 
(c)  One satnple ballot of the party for which the voter has disclosed a preference, as evidenced by 
his or her registration, shall be mailed not more than 40 nor fewer than 10 days before the 
election to each voter entitled to vote at the primary who registered at least 29 days prior to the 
election. A nonpartisan sample ballot shall be so mailed to  each voter who is not registered as 
preferring any of the parties participating in the primary election, provided that on election day 
the voter may, upon request, vote the ballot of a political party if authorized by the party's rules, 
duly noticed to the Secretary of State. 
(d)  Each sample ballot prepared by a county elections official shall include a notice to voters 
informing the voters that vote by mail ballots may be returned by certified or registered mail or 
by secure electronic submission and shall include instructions on secure electronic submission of 
the vote by mail ballot.  This subdivision shall take effect when the Election Data Security 
Commission certifies software and procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail 
ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603, 

· 

40 


Section 13122 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 13122. Format ofelectronic submission ofvote by mail ballots. 

(a) Any vote by mail ballot returned by secure electronic submission shall be in substantially the 
same format as vote by mail ballots formatted and printed under this Division for the same 
election. 
{b)  The Election Data Security Commission shall ensure that the software for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots that is certified for statewide use pursuant to subdivision (c)  of 
Section 2603 complies with subdivision (a). 

Section 13246 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 13246. Marking device. 

The device for marking the ballot may be of any size, shape, or form, and the impression made 
on the ballot may be in the form of a cross, square, circle, rectangle, or any other design that will 
clearly indicate the choice of the voter. Any type of ink or other substance that will clearly show 
the voter's choice may be used in or in conjunction with the marking device. Marking device 
may also include software certified for use statewide by the Election Data Security Commission 
pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 14313 ofthe Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 14313. State of Emergency. 

(a) Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the Governor and the issuance of an 
executive order authorizing an emergency worker to cast a ballot outside of his or her home 
precinct, elections officials in the counties included in the executive order shall, upon demand, 
issue to an emergency worker a provisional ballot that may be identical to the provisional ballot 
offered to other voters in the county, using a process to be determined by the elections official. 
The elections official shall transmit for processing any ballot cast, including any materials 
necessary to process the ballot, pursuant to this section to the elections official in the county 
where the voter is registered to vote. 
(b) To be counted, a ballot cast pursuant to this section shall satisfy both of the following 
requirements: 
(1) Be cast by the voter no later than the close ofthe polls on election day. 
(2) Be received by the county elections official where the voter is registered on or before the 
10th day following the date of the election. 
(c) Upon receipt of the returned ballot, the elections official shall process the ballot pursuant to 
the procedures in subdivision ( c) of Section 14310. 
(d) Ifthe requirements in subdivisions (b) and (c) are met and the ballot is eligible to be counted, 
the ballot shall be duplicated and all other materials preserved according to the procedures set 
forth in this code. 

41 

(e) "Emergency worker" for the purposes of this section means a person who is officially 
engaged in responding to the proclaimed state of emergency and whose vocation has been 
identified in an executive order relating to the state of emergency. 
(/) Ifan emergency worker is already approved to  vote by mail,  or could reasonably be 
established as a vote by mail voter,  in his or her home county prior to election day,  county 
elections officials in the counties included in the executive order shall,  upon demand,  issue to the 
emergency worker a vote by mail ballot that may be returned by secure electronic submission. 
Upon request,  the elections official shall send the vote by mail ballot to  the emergency worker 
either by mail, facsimile,  or electronic transmission as requested by the voter.  This subdivision 
shall take effect when the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures 
for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision 
(c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 15000 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15000. Testing ballot tabulating devices. 

No later than seven days prior to any election conducted pursuant to this code, the elections 
official shall conduct a test or series of tests to ensure. that every device used to tabulate ballots 
accurately records each vote. The exact methods employed in this test shall conform to the 
voting procedures for the specific voting systems, as adopted by the Secretary of State or shall 
conform to  the standards adopted by the Election Data Security Commission pursuant to 
subdivision (b)  ofSection 2602. 

Section 15002 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15002. Review of administrative procedures for voting systems. 

No later than January 1 of each even-numbered year, the Secretary of State shall review, and if 
necessary amend, administrative procedures for use with each ofthe voting systems pursuant to 
Division 19.  The Secretary ofState shall not review and amend procedures adopted by the 
Election Data Security Commission until the Commission ceases to exist pursuant to subdivision 
(g)  ofSection 2600. 

Section 15101  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15101. Processing vote by mail ballots returned in person or by mail. 

(a) Any jurisdiction in which vote by mail ballots are cast and returned in person or by mail may 
begin to process vote by mail ballot return envelopes beginning 29 days before the election. 
Processing vote by mail ballot return envelopes.may include verifying the voter's signature on 
the vote by mail ballot return envelope pursuant to Section 3019 and updating voter history 
records. 
(b) Any jurisdiction having the necessary computer capability may start to process vote by mail 
ballots returned in person or by mail on the 10th business day before the election. Processing 

42 


vote by mail ballots includes opening vote by mail ballot return envelopes, removing ballots, 
duplicating any damaged ballots, and preparing the ballots to be machine read, or machine 
reading them, but under no circumstances may a vote count be accessed or released until 8 p.m. 
on the day of the election. All other jurisdictions shall start to process vote by mail ballots at 5 
p.m. on the day before the election. 
(c) Results of any vote by mail ballot tabulation or count shall not be released before the close of 
the polls on the day of the election. 

Section 15101.1  of the Elections Code is hereby added to read as follows: 

§ 15101.1 Processing vote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission. 

(a) Any jurisdiction in which vote by mail ballots are cast and returned by secure electronic 
submission may begin to process these ballots beginning 29 days before the election. Processing 
vote by mail ballots returned by electronic submission may include verifying the voter pursuant 
to Section 3019.J and updating voter history records. 
(b) Any jurisdiction may start to count vote by mail ballots returned by electronic submission on 
the I 0th business day before the election using software and procedures certified for use 
statewide by the Election Data Security Commission,  but under no circumstances may a vote 
count be accessed or released until 8 p.m. on the day ofthe election. 
(c) Results ofany vote by mail ballot tabulation or count shall not be released before the close of 
the polls on the day ofthe election. 
(d)  This section shall become effective upon certification ofsoftware and procedures for 
canvassing vote by mail ballots returned by electronic submission certified by the Election Data 
Security Commission for statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 15104 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15104. Observation of absentee ballot processing and counting. 

(a) The processing of vote by mail ballot return envelopes, and the processing and counting of 
vote by mail ballots, including processing and counting ofvote by mail ballots returned by 
secure electronic submission using software andprocedures certified for use statewide by the 
Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603,  shall be open to 
the public, both prior to and after the election. 
(b) A member of the county grand jury, and at least one member each of the Republican county 
central committee, the Democratic county central committee, and of any other party with a 
candidate on the ballot, and any other interested organization, shall be permitted to observe and 
challenge the manner in which the vote by mail ballots are handled, from the processing of vote 
by mail ballot return envelopes through the counting and disposition of the ballots and including 
the processing and counting ofvote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission 
using software andprocedures certified for use statewide by the Election Data Security 
Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

43 

(c) The elections official shall notify vote by mail voter observers and the public at least 48 hours 
in advance of the dates, times, and places where vote by mail ballots will be processed and 
counted. 
(d) Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of Section 2194, vote by mail voter 
observers shall be allowed sufficiently close access to enable them to observe the vote by mail 
ballot return envelopes and the signatures thereon and challenge whether those individuals 
handling vote by mail ballots are following established procedures, including all of the 
following: 
(1) Verifying signatures and addresses on the vote by mail ballot return envelopes by comparing 
them to voter registration information. 
(2) Duplicating accurately damaged or defective ballots. 
(3) Securing vote by mail ballots to prevent tampering with them before they are counted on 
election day. 
(e) Notwithstanding paragraph (2)  ofsubdivision (b)  ofSection 2194,  vote by mail voter 
observers shall be allowed sufficiently close access to  enable them to  observe the processing and 
counting ofvote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission and challenge whether 
those individuals processing and counting the ballots are following the procedures certified for 
statewide use by the Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 
2603. 
(I) A vote by mail voter observer shall not interfere with the orderly processing of vote by mail 
ballot return envelopes or the processing and counting of vote by mail ballots, including the 
touching or handling of the ballots or otherwise interfering with the software and procedures for 
canvassing vote by mail ballots returned by electronic submission certified for statewide use by 
the Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 15105 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§15105. Challenge of vote by mail voters. 

Prior to processing and opening the identification envelopes of vote by mail voters or processing 
vote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission, the elections official shall make 
available a list of vote by mail voters for public inspection, from which challenges may be 
presented. Challenges may be made for the same reasons as those made against a voter voting at 
a polling place. In addition, a challenge may be entered on the grounds that the ballot was not 
received within the time provided by this code or that a person is imprisoned for a conviction of 
a felony. All challenges shall be made prior to the opening of the identification envelope or 
electronically verifying the vote of the challenged vote by mail voter. 

Section 15106 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15106. Applicable law; burden of proof. 

Except as otherwise provided, the processing of vote by mail ballot return envelopes, the 
processing and counting of vote by mail ballots, including those returned by secure electronic 
submission once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for 
use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603,  and the disposition of challenges of 

44 


vote by mail ballots,  including those returned by secure electronic submission,  shall be 
according to the laws now in force pertaining to the election for which they are cast Because the 
voter is not present, the challenger shall have the burden of establishing extraordinary proof of 
the validity of the challenge at the time the challenge is made. 

Section 15107 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§15107. Challenge overruled. 

(a)  If a challenge to a vote by mail ballot returned in person or by mail is overruled, the board 
shall open the identification envelope without defacing the affidavit printed on it or mutilating 
the enclosed ballot and, without viewing the ballot, remove it and destroy the numbered slip, if 
any remains, and store the ballots in a secure location. 
(b) Ifa challenge to a vote by mail ballot returned by secure electronic submission is overruled, 
the board shallproceed with processing and counting the ballot using software andprocedures 
certifiedfor use statewide by the Election Data Security Commission.  This subdivision shall 
become effective once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software andprocedures 
for canvassing vote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission pursuant to 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 15108 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15108. Challenge allowed. 

(a) If a challenge to a vote by mail ballot returned in person or by mail is allowed, the board 
shall endorse on the face ofthe identification envelope the cause of the challenge and its action 
thereon. 
(b) Ifa challenge to  a vote by mail ballot returned by secure electronic submission is allowed, 
the board shall ensure that the ballot is not counted and shall clearly document the reason for 
the challenge and its action thereon.  The Election Data Security Commission may provide for 
standards for documentation ofchallenged ballots returned by secure electronic submission. 

Section 15150 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15150. Conduct of the semifinal official canvas. 

For every election, the elections official shall conduct a semifinal official canvass by tabulating 
vote by mail ballots returned in person or by mail,  vote by mail ballots returned by secure 
electronic submission once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and 
procedures for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603,  and precinct ballots 
and compiling the results. The semifinal official canvass shall commence immediately upon the 
close of the .polls and shall continue without adjournment until all precincts are accounted for. 

45 


Section 15151  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15151. Transmission of semifmal official results to Secretary of State. 

(a) The elections official shall transmit the semifinal official results to the Secretary of State in 
the manner and according to the schedule prescribed by the Secretary of State prior to each 
election, for the following: 
(1) All candidates voted for statewide office. 
(2) All candidates voted for the following offices: 
(A) State Assembly. 
(B) State Senate. 
(C) Member of the United States House of Representatives. 
(D) Member ofthe State Board of Equalization. 
(E) Justice ofthe Court ofAppeals. 
(3) All persons voted for at the presidential primary or for electors of President and Vice 
President of the United States. 
(4) Statewide ballot measures. 
(b) The results transmitted pursuant to subdivision (a)  shall include separate totals for vote by 
mail ballots returned in person or by mail,  vote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic 
submission and ballots voted at a precinct.  This subdivision shall become effective once the 
Election Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for use statewide pursuant 
to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 
(c)The elections official shall transmit the results to the Secretary of State at intervals no greater 
than two hours, following commencement ofthe semifinal official canvass. 

Section 15154 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15154. Rejected ballots. 

(a) Any ballot that is not marked as provided by law shall be rejected. The rejected ballots shall 
be placed in the package marked for voted ballots or in a separate container as directed by the 
elections official. All rejected ballots shall have written on the ballot the cause for rejection and 
be signed by a majority ofprocessing board members who are assigned by the elections official 
to process ballots. 
(b) The following ballot conditions shall not render a ballot invalid: 
(1) Soiled or defaced. 
(2) Two or more impressions of the voting stamp or mark in one voting square. 
(3) Contains personal infonnation, as defined in Section 14287. 
(c) If a voter indicates, either by a combination of both marking and writing in, a choice of more 
names than there are candidates to be elected or nominated for any office, or if for any reason the 
choice of the voter is impossible to detennine, the vote for that office shall not be counted, but 
the remainder of the ballot, if properly marked, shall be counted. 
(d) Any ballot that is returned by secure electronic submission but is  rejected because the voter 
cannot be verified or is ineligible to vote or for some other reason shall be clearly documented in 
the  board records,  including the  name of the  voter and the reason the ballot was rejected.  The 

46 

Election Data Security  Commission may provide for standards for documentation  ofchallenged 
ballots  returned by secure  electronic submission.  This  subdivision  shall become  effective  once 
the Election Data Security  Commission certifies software and procedures for canvassing vote by 
mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission for use  statewide pursuant to  subdivision 
(c)  ofSection 2603. 
(e) This section applies to all ballots counted pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 4 
(commencing with Section 15300). 

Section 15302 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15302. Tasks of the Official Canvass. 

The official canvass shall include, but not be limited to, the following tasks: 
(a) An inspection of all materials and supplies returned by poll workers. 
(b) A reconciliation of the number of signatures on the roster with the number of ballots recorded 
on the ballot statement. 
(c) In the event of a discrepancy in the reconciliation required by subdivision (b), the number of 
ballots received from each polling place shall be reconciled with the number of ballots cast, as 
indicated on the ballot statement. 
(d) A reconciliation of the number of ballots counted, spoiled, canceled, or invalidated due to 
identifying marks, overvotes, or as otherwise provided by statute, with the number of votes 
recorded, including vote by mail and provisional ballots, by the vote counting system. 
(e) Processing and counting any valid vote by mail and provisional ballots not included in the 
semifinal official canvass. Once the Election Datq Security Commission certifies software and 
procedures for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603, processing and 
counting any ballots not included in the semifinal official canvass shall include separate totals of 
votes cast on vote by mail ballots returned by mail or in person, vote by mail ballots returned by 
secure electronic submission,  and ballots voted at precincts. 
(f) Counting any valid write-in votes. 
(g) Reproducing any damaged ballots, if necessary. 
(h) Reporting final results to the governing board and the Secretary of State, as required.  Once 
the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for statewide use 
pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603, final results shall include separate totals ofvotes 
cast on vote by mail ballots returned by mail or in person,  vote by mail ballots returned by 
secure electronic submission,  and ballots voted at precincts. 

Section 15320 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15320. Processing and counting vote by mail ballots. 

Vote by mail ballots  and mail ballot precinct ballots returned to  the  elections  office  and  to  the 
polls on election day that are not included in the semifinal official canvass phase of the election 
shall be processed and counted during the official canvass in the manner prescribed by Chapter 2 

47 

(commencing with Section 15100) and pursuant to the requirements of Section 3019 and Section 
3019.1. 

Section 15360 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as  follows: 

§15360. Manual tally when using a voting system.· 

(a) During the official canvass of every election in which a voting system is used, the official 
conducting the election shall conduct a public manual tally of the ballots tabulated by those 
devices, including vote by mail ballots, using either of the following methods: 
(1) (A) A public manual tally of the ballots, including vote by mail ballots, cast in 1 percent of 
the precincts chosen at random by the elections official. If 1 percent of the precincts is less than 
one whole precinct, the tally shall be conducted in one precinct chosen at random by the 
elections official. 
(B) (i) In addition to the 1 percent manual tally, the elections official shall, for each race not 
included in the initial group of precincts, count one additional precinct. The manual tally shall 
apply only to the race not previously counted. 
(ii) Additional precincts for the manual tally may be selected at the discretion of the elections 
official. 
(2) A two-part public manual tally, which includes both of the following: 
(A) A public manual tally of the ballots, not including vote by mail ballots, cast in 1 percent of 
the precincts chosen at random by the elections official and conducted pursuant to paragraph (1 ). 
(B) (i) A public manual tally of not less than 1 percent of the vote by mail ballots cast in the 
election. Batches of vote by mail ballots shall be chosen at random by the elections official. 
(ii) For the purposes of this section, a ''batch" means a set ofballots tabulated by the voting 
system devices, for which the voting system can produce a report of the votes cast. 
(iii) (I) In addition to the 1 percent manual tally of the vote by mail ballots, the elections official 
shall, for each race not included in the initial 1 percent manual tally.of vote by mail ballots, count 
one additional batch of vote by mail ballots. The manual tally shall apply only to the race not 
previously counted. 
(II) Additional batches for the manual tally may be selected at the discretion of the elections 
official. 
(b) Ifvote by mail ballots are cast on a direct recording electronic voting system at the office of 
an elections official or at a satellite location of the office of an elections official pursuant to 
Section 3018, the official conducting the election shall either include those ballots in the manual 
tally conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision ( a) or conduct a public manual 
tally of those ballots cast on no fewer than 1 percent of all the direct recording electronic voting 
machines used in that election chosen at random by the elections official. 
(c) Ifvote by mail ballots are returned by secure electronic submission,  the official conducting 
the election shall include those ballots in the manual tally conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) 
or paragraph (2)  ofsubdivision (a).  This subdivision shall become effective once the Election 
Data Security Commission certifies software andprocedures for returning and canvassing vote 
by mail ballots by secure electronic submission for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  of 
Section 2603. 
(d)  The elections official shall use either a random number generator or other method specified 
in regulations that shall be adopted by the Secretary of State to randomly choose the initial 

48 


precincts, batches of vote by mail ballots, or direct recording electronic voting machines subject 
to the public manual tally. 
(de) The manual tally shall be a public process, with the official conducting the election 
providing at least a five-day public notice of the time and place of the manual tally and of the 
time and place of the selection of the precincts, batches, or direct recording electronic voting 
machines subject to the public manual tally prior to  conducting the selection and tally. 
(ej) The official conducting the election shall include a report on the results of the 1 percent 
manual tally in the certification of the official canvass of the vote.  This report shall identify any 
discrepancies between the machine count and the manual tally and a description of how each of 
these discrepancies was resolved. In resolving any discrepancy involving a vote recorded by 
means of a punchcard voting system or by electronic or electromechanical vote tabulating 
devices,  other than any tabulating device used as part ofa system for secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots, the voter verified paper audit trail shall govern if there is a 
discrepancy between it and the electronic record.  To  resolve any discrepancy involving a vote 
recorded by means ofsecure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots,  the paper audit trail 
shall govern ifthere is a discrepancy between it and the electronic record. 

Section 15551  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15551.Voted ballots to be retained; contest or prosecution. 

If a contest or any such criminal prosecution has been commenced prior to the date fixed 

for its destruction, the package containing the voted ballots shall be subject to the order of the 
court in which the contest or criminal prosecution is pending and shall not be destroyed until 
after final detennination of the contest or criminal prosecution. 

In the case of a congressional election contest, the elections official shall hold the ballots 
of that congressional district in custody subject to the inspection of any committee of the House 
of Representatives having in charge the investigation of the contest, until the final detennination 
of the contest by the House of Representatives. 

In the case of a contest in the State Legislature, the elections official shall hold the ballots 

of the Senate or Assembly district in custody subject to the inspection of any committee of the 
Senate or Assembly having in charge the investigation of the contest until the final detennination 
of the contest or the final adjournment of the session of the Legislature in which the contest is 
filed,  whichever is the later. 

This Section shall also apply to electronic records ofballots returned by secure 

electronic submission once the Election Data Security Commission certifies software and 
procedures for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to  . 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

In no event shall the package or its contents be taken from the custody of the elections 

official. 

49 


Section 15601 of the Elections Code-is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 15601. Conditions for recount. 
(a) The Secretary of State, within the Secretary of State's existing budget, shall adopt regulations 
no later than January 1, 2008, for each voting system approved for use in the state and specify 
the procedures for recounting ballots, including vote by mail and provisional ballots, using those 
voting systems. 
(b) No later than January 1, 2018, the Secretary of State shall revise and adopt regulations 
specifying procedures for recounting ballots, including regulations establishing guidelines for 
charges a county elections official may impose when conducting a manual recount pursuant to 
this chapter. 
(c)  The Secretary ofState,  within the Secretary ofState's existing budget, shall update the 
regulations adopted pursuant to subdivision (a)  to specify procedures for recounting vote by 
mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission no later than 6 months after the Election 
Data Security Commission certifies software and procedures for the secure electronic 
submission ofvote by mail ballots for use statewide pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 

Section 17307 is hereby added to the Elections Code to read as follows: 

§ 17307. Presen,ation ofballots; vote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic submission. 

(a)  The elections official shall preserve all vote by mail ballots returned by secure electronic 
submission and all electronic and paper records and other materials associated with the secure 
electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots for the following time periods: 
(1)  22 months for any election where candidates for one or more ofthe following offices are 
voted upon: President,  Vice President,  United States Senator,  and United States Representative. 
(2)  six months for any state or local election notprovidedfor in subdivision (a). 
(b)  The Election Data Security Commission may adopt regulations identifying records related to 
secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots that must be retained by elections officials. 

Section 18564 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 

§ 18564. Tampering with voting devices, secrecy of ballot, software. 

Any person is guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment pursuant to subdivision (h) of 
Section 1170 of the Pena! Code for two, three, or four years who, before or during an election: 
(a) Tampers with, interferes with, or attempts to interfere with, the correct operation of, or 
willfully damages in order to prevent the use of, any voting machine, voting device, voting 
system, vote tabulating device, or ballot tally software program source codes. 
(b)  Tampers with,  interferes with,  or attempts to interfere with the correct operation ofthe 
software and procedures for voters to electronically submit vote by mail ballots andfor elections 
officials to canvass vote by mail ballots that are electronically submitted that are used for pilot 
programs pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 or are certified for statewide use by the 
Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603. 
(be) Interferes or attempts to interfere with the secrecy of voting or ballot tally software program 
source codes. 

. 

· 

50 

(ed) Knowingly, and without authorization, makes or has in his or her possession a key to a 
voting machine that has been adopted and will be used in elections in this state. 
(tie) Willfully substitutes or attempts to substitute forged or counterfeit ballot tally software 
program source codes. 

Section 18564.5 of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read: 

§ 18564.5. Civil action for changing voting system hardware or software. 

(a}The Secretary of State, Attorney General, and any local elections official in the county in 

which the act occurs, may bring a civil action against an individual, business, or other legal 
entity that commits any of the following acts before, during,  or after an election: 
(1) Tampers, interferes, or attempts to interfere with the correct operation of, or willfully 
damages in order to prevent the use of, any voting machine, voting device, voting system, vote 
tabulating device, or ballot tally software. 
(2)  Tampers with,  interferes with,  or attempts to  interfere with the correct operation ofthe 
software and procedures for voters to electronically submit vote by mail ballots and for elections 
officials to  canvass vote by mail ballots that are electronically submitted that are used for pilot 
programs pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 or are certified for use statewide by the 
Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 .. 
(23) Interferes or attempts to interfere with the secrecy of voting or interferes or attempts to 

interfere with ballot tally software program source codes. 

(J4) Knowingly, and without authorization, gains access to or provides another person or persons 

with access to a voting machine for the purpose of committing one of the acts specified by this 

section. 

(45) Willfully substitutes or attempts to substitute forged,  counterfeit, or malicious ballot tally 

software program source codes. 

(~6) Knowingly, and without authorization, inserts or causes the insertion of uncertified 

hardware, software, or finnware, for whatever purpose, into any voting machine, voting device, 

voting system, vote tabulating device, or ballot tally software. 

(e7) Fails to notify the Secretary of State prior to any change in hardware, software, or firmware 

to a voting machine, voting device, voting system, or vote tabulating device, certified or 

conditionally certified for use in this state. 

(b) A civil action may be brought pursuant to this section for a civil penalty not to exceed fifty 

thousand dollars ($50,000) for each act and for injunctive relief, if appropriate. 


Section 19007 of the Elections Code is hereby added to read as  follows: 

§ 19007. Inapplicable to electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots. 

Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw,  this division shall not apply to standards for secure 
electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots developed by the Election Data Security 
Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2602, pilot programs conducted by the 
Election Data Security Commission pursuant to subdivision (b)  ofSection 2603 or any software 
or procedures certified by the Election Data Security Commission for secure electronic 

51 


submission ofvote by mail ballots pursuant to subdivision (c)  ofSection 2603 until the 
Commission ceases to  exist pursuant to subdivision (g)  ofSection 2600. 

Section 19205 of the Elections Code is hereby repealed. 

§19205. Voting system eommunieation restrietions. 

,A,._  voting system shall comply 1.vith all of the follovling: 
(a) No part of the voting system shall be connected to the Internet at any time. 
(b) No part of the voting system shall electronically receive or transmit election data through an 
exterior  conununication netv1ork,  including  the public telephone  system,  if the  communication 
originates from or terminates at a polling place, satellite location, or counting center. 
(c)  No part of the voting system shall receive or transmit wireless  com1nunications  or wireless 
data transfers. 

Section 19271  of the Elections Code is hereby amended to read as  follows: 

§ 19271. Definitions. 

As used in this article: 
(a) "Accessible" means that the information provided on the paper record copy from the voter 
verified paper audit trail mechanism is provided or conveyed to voters via both a visual and a 
nonvisual method, such as through an audio component. 
(b) "Direct recording electronic voting system" means a voting system that records a vote 
electronically and does not require or permit the voter to record his or her vote directly onto a 
tangible ballot. Provided,  however,  "direct recording electronic voting system" does not include 
any system developed for secure electronic submission ofvote by mail ballots. 
(c)  "Voter verified paper audit trail" means a component of a direct recording electronic voting 
system that prints a contemporaneous paper record copy of each electronic ballot and allows 
each voter to confirm his or her selections before the voter casts his or her ballot. 
(d) "Federal qualification" means the system has been certified, if applicable, by means of 
qualification testing by a nationally recognized test laboratory and has met or exceeded the 
minimum requirements set forth in the Perfonnance and Text Standards for Punch Card, Mark 
Sense, and Direct Recording Electronic Voting Systems, or in any successor voluntary standard 
document, developed and promulgated by the Federal Election Commission, the Election 
Assistance Commission, or the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
(e)  "Paper record copy" means an auditable document printed by a voter verified paper audit trail 
component that corresponds to the voter's electronic vote and lists the contests on the ballot and 
the voter's selections for those contests. A paper record copy is not a ballot. 
(f) "Parallel monitoring" means the testing of a randomly selected sampling of voting equipment 
on election day designed to simulate actual election conditions to  confirm that the system is 
registering votes accurately. 

52 


Section 19295 of the Elections Code is hereby repealed. 

§19295 ForbiddeB Capabilities 

A ballot marking system or part of a ballot marking system shall not do any of the follovr...ng: 
(a) Have the capability, including an optional capability, to use a remote server to mark a voter's 
selections transmitted to the server from the voter's computer via the Internet. 
(b) Have the capability, including an optional capability, to store any v·oter identifiable selections 
on any remote server. 
(c) Have the capability, including the optional capability, to tabulate votes. 

SECTION 10.  AMENDMENT. 

(a) The provisions of this Act may be amended to carry out its purpose and intent by a 
unanimous recommendation from the Election Data Security Commission, or by a 
recommendation from the Secretary of State once the Commission ceases to exist pursuant to 
subdivision (g) of Section 2600, and subsequent statutes approved by a two thirds vote of each 
house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor or by initiative. 
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), Section 8 of this Act maybe amended to carry out its 
purpose and intent by a majority vote of each house of the Legislature and signed by the 
Governor. 

SECTION 11.  SEVERABILITY. 

If any provision in this Act, or part thereof, or the application of any provision or part to any 
person or circumstance is held for any reason to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining 
provisions and parts shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end 
the provisions of this Act are severable. · 

SECTION 12.  CONFLICTING MEASURES. 

In the event that this measure and another measure or measures impose requirements to evaluate 
the security of voting systems or provide for electronic submission ofballots, the provisions of 
the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this measure.  In the event 
that this measure receives a greater number of affirmative votes, the provisions of this measure 
shall prevail in their entirety, and the provisions of the other measure shall be null and void. 

53 


