1 5  - 0  1 0  3  Arndt.# I 

December 7,  2015 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

El 

DEC  O 7 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

RE:  Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure -

Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act, No.  15-0103 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

As you know, I serve as counsel for the proponents of the proposed 

statewide initiative, "Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act." 
The proponents of the proposed initiative are Dr. Donald Lyman and 
Mr. Michael Sutton.  On their behalf, I am enclosing the following documents: 

•  The amended text of "Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of 

Marijuana Act" 

•  A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended texT 
•  Signed authorizations from each of the proponents for the submission of 
the amended text together with their requests that the Attorney General's 011ice 
prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this 

proposed initiative to me at the address listed below: 

Lance H.  Olson 
Olson, Hagel &  Fishburn LLP 
555 Capitol Mall, Suite 1425 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Very truly yours, 

OLSON HAGEL &  FISHBURN LLP 

(ID_(  (1~ 

U

ANCE H. OLSON 
LHO:mdm 
I:\ WPDOCIPUBLIC\POL\40083-4\Amendment Cover Letter 12. 7.15.docx 

www.olsonhagel.com ~~ 

VIA MESSENGER 

December 7,  2016 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to  Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act, No. 
15-0103, and Request to Prepare Circulating Title and Summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On November 2,  2015, the proponents of a proposed statewide initiative titled "Control, Regulate 
and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act" ("Initiative") submitted a request that the Attorney General 
prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to  section 10( d) of Article II of the California 
Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), the proponents hereby submit timely 
amendments to the text of the Initiative.  As one of the proponents of the Initiative, I approve the 
submission of the amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably 
germane to the theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative. I request that the Attorney General 
prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Sinc~relJ' 
~<:J~ 
,  Michael Sutton 

VIA MESSENGER 

December 7, 2016 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I"  Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re:  Submission of Amendment to Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act, No. 
15-0103, and Request to Prepare Circulating Title and Summary 

Dear Ms.  Johansson: 

On November 2, 2015, the proponents of a proposed statewide initiative titled "Control, Regulate 
and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act" ("Initiative") submitted a request that the Attorney General 
prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to section lO(d) of Article II of the California 
Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), the proponents hereby submit timely 
amendments to the text of the Initiative.  As one 
e proponents of the Initiative, I approve the 
submission of the amended text to the Initiative  n  I declare that the amendment is reasonably 
germane to the theme, purpose, and subject oft  e  nitiative. I request that the Attorney General 
prepare a circulating title and summary 

amended Initiative. 

·ng t 

Sincerely, 

Dr. Donald Lyman 

15-0103  Arndt.#  J 

SECTION 1.  TITLE. 

This measure shall be known as the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act ("the 
Adult Use of Marijuana Act"). 

SECTION 2.  FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS. 

A. 
Currently in California, nonmedical marijuana use is unregulated, untaxed, and occurs 
without any consumer or enviromnental protections. The Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use 
of Marijuana Act will legalize marijuana for those over 21  years old, protect children, and 
establish laws to regulate marijuana cultivation, distribution, sale and use, and will protect 
Californians and the enviromnent from potential dangers. It establishes the Bureau of Marijuana 
Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs to regulate and license the marijuana 
industry. 

Marijuana is currently legal in our state for medical use and illegal for nomnedical use. 

B. 
Abuse of the medical marijuana system in California has long been widespread, but recent 
bipartisan legislation signed by Governor Jerry Brown is establishing a comprehensive 
regulatory scheme for medical marijuana. The Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of 
Marijuana Act (hereafter called the Adult Use of Marijuana Act) will consolidate and streamline 
regulation and taxation for both nomnedical and medical marijuana. 

C. 
Currently, marijuana growth and sale is not being taxed by the State of California, which 
means our state is missing out on hundreds of millions of dollars in potential tax revenue every 
year. The Adult Use of Marijuana Act will tax both the growth and sale of marijuana to  generate 
hundreds of millions of dollars annually. The revenues will cover the cost of administering the 
new law and will provide funds to:  invest in public health programs that educate youth to prevent 
and treat serious substance abuse; train local law enforcement to enforce the new law with a 
focus on DUI enforcement; invest in communities to reduce the illicit market and create job 
oppo1iunities; and provide for environmental cleanup and restoration of public lands damaged by 
illegal marijuana cultivation. 

Currently, children under the age of 18  can just as  easily purchase marijuana on the black 
D. 
market as adults can. By legalizing marijuana, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act will incapacitate 
the black market, and move marijuana purchases into a legal structure with strict safeguards 
against children accessing it. The Adult Use of Maiijuana Act prohibits the sale of nom11edical 
marijuana to those under 21  years old, and provides new resources to  educate youth against drug 
abuse and train local law enforcement to enforce the new law. It bars marijuana businesses from 
being located within 600 feet of schools and other areas where children congregate. It establishes 
mandatory and strict packaging and labeling requirements for marijuana and marijuana products. 
And it mandates that marijuana and marijuana products cannot be advertised or marketed 
towards children. 

There are currently no laws governing adult use marijuana businesses to  ensure that they 

E. 
operate in accordance with existing California laws.  Adult use of marijuana may only be 

1 

accessed from the unregulated illicit market. The Adult Use of Marijuana Act sets up a 
comprehensive system governing marijuana businesses at the state level and safeguards local 
control, allowing local governments to regulate marijuana-related activities, to subject marijuana 
businesses to  zoning and pennitting requirements, and to ban marijuana businesses by a vote of 
the people within a locality. 

F. 
Currently, illegal marijuana growers steal or divert millions of gallons of water without 
any accountability. The Adult Use of Marijuana Act will create strict enviromnental regulations 
to ensure that the marijuana is grown efficiently and legally, to regulate the use of pesticides, to 
prevent wasting water, and to minimize water usage. The Adult Use of Marijuana Act will crack 
down on the illegal use of water and punish bad actors, while providing funds to restore lands 
that have been damaged by illegal marijuana grows. If a business does not demonstrate they are 
in full compliance with the applicable water usage and environmental laws, they will have their 
license revoked. 

Currently, the courts are clogged with cases of non-violent drug offenses.  By legalizing 
G. 
marijuana, the Adult Use of Marijuana Act will alleviate pressure on the courts, but continue to 
allow prosecutors to  charge the most serious marijuana-related offenses as felonies, while 
reducing the penalties for minor marijuana-related offenses as set forth in the Act. 

By bringing marijuana into a regulated and legitimate market, the Adult Use of Marijuana 

H. 
Act creates a transparent and accountable system.  This will help police crackdown on the 
underground black market that currently benefits violent drug cartels and transnational gangs, 
which are making billions from marijuana trafficking and jeopardizing public safety. 

The Adult Use of Marijuana Act creates a comprehensive regulatory structure in which 

I. 
every marijuana business is overseen by a specialized agency with relevant expertise. The 
Bureau of Marijuana Control, housed in the Department of Consumer Affairs, will oversee the 
whole system and ensure a smooth transition to the legal market, with licenses issued beginning 
in 2018. The Department of Consumer Affairs will also license and oversee marijuana retailers, 
distributors, and microbusinesses. The Department of Food and Agriculture will license and 
oversee marijuana cultivation, ensuring it is environmentally safe. The Department of Public 
Health will license and oversee manufacturing and testing, ensuring consumers receive a safe 
product. The State Board of Equalization will collect the special marijuana taxes, and the 
Controller will allocate the revenue to  administer the new law and provide the funds to  critical 
investments. 

The Adult Use of Marijuana Act ensures the nonmedical marijuana industry in California 

J. 
will be built around small and medium sized businesses by prohibiting large-scale cultivation 
licenses for the first five years.  The Adult Use of Marijuana Act also protects consumers and 
small businesses by imposing strict anti-monopoly restrictions for businesses that participate in 
the nonmedical marijuana industry. 

2 

SECTION 3.  PURPOSE AND INTENT. 

The purpose of the Adult Use of Marijuana Act is to establish a comprehensive system to 
legalize, control and regulate the cultivation, processing, manufacture, distribution, testing, and 
sale of nonmedical marijuana, including marijuana products, for use by adults 21  years and 
older, and to tax the commercial growth and retail sale of marijuana.  It is the intent of the People 
in enacting this Act to accomplish the following: 

(a) Take nomnedical marijuana production and sales out of the hands of the illegal market and 
bring them under a regulatory structure that prevents access by minors and protects public safety, 
public health, and the environment. 

(b) Strictly control the cultivation, processing, manufacture, distribution, testing and sale of 
nonmedical marijuana through a system of state licensing, regulation, and enforcement. 

(c) Allow local governments to enforce state laws and regulations for nom11edical marijuana 
businesses and enact additional local requirements for nomnedical marijuana businesses, but not 
require that they do so for a nomnedical marijuana business to be issued a state license and be 
legal under state law. 

( d) Allow local governments to ban nomnedical marijuana businesses as  set f01ih in this Act. 

(e) Require track and trace management procedures to track nonmedical marijuana from 
cultivation to sale. 

(f) Require nomnedical marijuana to be comprehensively tested by independent testing services 
for the presence of contaminants, including mold and pesticides, before it can be sold by licensed 
businesses. 

(g) Require nonmedical marijuana sold by licensed businesses to be packaged in child-resistant 
containers and be labeled so that consumers are fully infonned about potency and the effects of 
ingesting nomnedical marijuana. 

(h) Require licensed nomnedical marijuana businesses to follow strict environmental and product 
safety standards as a condition of maintaining their license. 

(i) Prohibit the sale of nomnedical marijuana by businesses that also sell alcohol or tobacco. 

(j) Prohibit the marketing and advertising of nomnedical marijuana to persons younger than 21 
years old or near schools or other places where children are present. 

(k)  Strengthen the state's existing medical marijuana system by requiring patients to obtain by 
January 1, 2018, a new recommendation from their physician that meets the strict standards 
signed into law by the Governor in 2015, and by providing new privacy protections for patients 
who obtain medical marijuana identification cards as set forth in this Act. 

3 

(1)  Pennit adults 21  years and older to use, possess, purchase and grow nonmedical marijuana 
within defined limits for use by adults 21  years and older as set forth in this Act. 

(m) Allow local governments to reasonably regulate the cultivation of nonmedical marijuana for 
personal use by adults 21  years and older through zoning and other local laws, and only to ban 
outdoor cultivation as set forth in this Act. 

(n) Deny access to marijuana by persons younger than 21  years old who are not medical 
marijuana patients. 

( o) Prohibit the consumption of marijuana in a public place unlicensed for such use, including 
near K-12 schools and other areas where children are present. 

(p) Maintain existing laws making it unlawful to operate a car or other vehicle used for 
transportation while impaired by marijuana. 

( q) Prohibit the cultivation of marijuana on public lands or while trespassing on private lands. 

(r) Allow public and private employers to enact and enforce workplace policies pertaining to 
man Juana. 

(s) Tax the growth and sale of marijuana in a way that drives out the illicit market for marijuana 
and discourages use by minors, and abuse by adults. 

(t) Generate hundreds of millions of dollars in new state revenue annually for restoring and 
repairing the enviromnent, youth treatment and prevention, community investment, and law 
enforcement. 

(u) Prevent illegal production or distribution of marijuana. 

(v)  Prevent the illegal diversion of marijuana from California to other states or countries or to 
the illegal market. 

(w) Preserve scarce law enforcement resources to prevent and prosecute violent crime. 

(x) Reduce barriers to entry into the legal, regulated market. 

(y) Require minors who commit marijuana-related offenses to complete drug prevention 
education or counseling and c01mnunity service. 

(z) Authorize courts to resentence persons who are currently serving a sentence for offenses for 
which the penalty is reduced by the Act, so long as the person does not pose a risk to public 
safety, and to redesignate or dismiss such offenses from the criminal records of persons who 
have completed their sentences as set forth in this Act. 

4 

(aa) Allow industrial hemp to be grown as an agricultural product, and for agricultural or 
academic research, and regulated separately from the strains of cannabis with higher delta-9 
tetrahydrocannabinol concentrations. 

SECTION 4.  PERSONAL USE. 

Sections 11018 of the Health and Safety Code is hereby amended, and Sections 11018.1 and 
11018.2 of the Health and Safety Code are hereby added to read: 

11018. Marijuana 
"Marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds 
thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, 
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature 
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks,  oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, 
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks 
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,  oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant vihich 
is incapable of gennination: 
(a)  industrial hemp,  as defined in Section 11018.5; or 
(b)  the weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral 
administrations, food,  drink,  or other product. 

11018.1. Marijuana Products 
"Marijuana products" means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant 
material has been transformed into a concentrate,  including,  but not limited to,  concentrated 
cannabis,  or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated cannabis and 
other ingredients. 

11018.2. Marijuana Accessories 
"Marijuana accessories" means any equipment, products or materials of any kind which are 
used,  intended for use,  or designed for use in planting, propagating,  cultivating, growing, 
harvesting,  manufacturing,  compounding,  converting, producing, processing, preparing,  testing, 
analyzing, packaging,  repackaging,  storing,  smoking,  vaporizing, or containing marijuana,  or 
for ingesting,  inhaling,  or otherwise introducing marijuana or marijuana products into the 
human body. 

Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45 are added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

11362.1. 
(a)  Subject to Sections 11362.2,  11362.3,  11362.4,  and 11362.45,  but notwithstanding any other 
provision of law,  it shall be lawful under state and local law,  and shall not be a violation of state 
or local law, for persons 21 years of age or older to: 
(1)  Possess, process,  transport, purchase,  obtain,  or give away to persons 21 years of age or 
older without any compensation whatsoever,  not more than 28.5 grams of marijuana not in the 
form of concentrated cannabis; 

5 

(2)  Possess, process,  transport, purchase,  obtain,  or give away to persons 21 years of age or 
older without any compensation whatsoever,  not more than eight grams of marijuana in the form 
of concentrated cannabis,  including as contained in marijuana products; 
(3)  Possess, plant,  cultivate,  harvest,  dry,  or process not more than six living marijuana plants 
and possess the marijuana produced by the plants; 
(4)  Smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana products; and 
(5)  Possess,  transport, purchase, obtain,  use,  manufacture,  or give away marijuana accessories 
to persons 21 years of age or older without any compensation whatsoever. 
(b)  Paragraph (5)  of subdivision (a)  is intended to  meet the requirements of subdivision(!) of 
Section 863 a/Title 21  of the  United States Code (21  US.C.  § 863(!)) by authorizing,  under state 
law,  any person in compliance with this section to manufacture, possess,  or distribute marijuana 
accessories. 
(c)  Marijuana and marijuana products involved in any way with conduct deemed lawful by this 
section are not contraband nor subject to seizure,  and no conduct deemed lawful by this section 
shall constitute the basis for detention,  search,  or arrest. 

11362.2. 
(a)  Personal cultivation of marijuana under paragraph (3)  of subdivision (a)  a/Section 11362.1 
is subject to  the following restrictions: 
(1) A person shall plant,  cultivate,  harvest,  dry,  or process plants in accordance with local 
ordinances,  if any,  adopted in accordance with subdivision (b)  of this section. 
(2)  The living plants and any marijuana produced by the plants in excess of 28.5 grams are kept 
within the person's private residence,  or upon the grounds of that private residence (e.g.,  in an 
outdoor garden area),  are in a locked space,  and are not visible by normal unaided vision from a 
public place. 
(3)  Not more than six living plants may be planted,  cultivated,  harvested,  dried,  or processed 
within a single private residence,  or upon the grounds of that private residence,  at one time. 
(b)(l) A  city,  county,  or city and county may enact and enforce reasonable regulations to 
reasonably regulate the actions and conduct in paragraph (3)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 
11362.1. 
(2)  Notwithstanding paragraph (1),  no city,  county,  or city and county may completely prohibit 
persons engaging in  the actions and conduct under paragraph (3)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 
11362.1 inside a private residence,  or inside an accessory structure to  a private residence 
located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure. 
(3)  Notwithstanding paragraph (3)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 113 62.1,  a city,  county,  or city 
and county may completely prohibit persons from engaging in actions and conduct under 
paragraph (3)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 11362.1 outdoors upon the grounds of a private 
residence. 
(4)  Paragraph (3)  of this subdivision shall beconie inoperable upon a determination by the 
California Attorney General that nonmedical use of marijuana is lawful in the State of California 
under federal law,  and an act taken by a city,  county,  or city and county under paragraph (3) 
shall be deemed repealed upon the date of such determination by the California Attorney 
General. 
(5)  For purposes of this section,  ''private residence" means a house,  an apartment unit,  a mobile 
home,  or other similar dwelling. 

6 

11362.3. 
(a) Nothing in Section 11362.1 shall be construed to permit any person to: 
(1)  Smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana products in any public place,  except in accordance 
with Section 26200 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(2)  Smoke marijuana or marijuana products in a location where snioking tobacco is prohibited. 
(3)  Smoke marijuana or marijuana products within 1, 000 feet of a school, day care center,  or 
youth center while children are present at such a school, day care center,  or youth center,  except 
in or upon the grounds of a private residence or in accordance with Section 26200 of the 
Business and Professions Code or Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions 
Code and only if such smoking is not detectable by others on the grounds of such a school, day 
care center,  or youth center while children are present. 
(4)  Possess an open container or open package of marijuana or marijuana products while 
driving,  operating,  or riding in the passenger seat or compartment of a motor vehicle,  boat, 
vessel,  aircraft,  or other vehicle used for transportation. 
(5) Possess, smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana products in or upon the grounds of a 
school,  day care center,  or youth center while children are present. 
(6)  Manufacture concentrated cannabis using a volatile solvent, unless done in accordance with 
a license under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(7)  Smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana products while driving,  operating a motor vehicle, 
boat,  vessel,  aircraft,  or other vehicle used for transportation. 
(8)  Smoke or ingest marijuana or marijuana products while riding in the passenger seat or 
compartment of a motor vehicle,  boat,  vessel,  aircraft,  or other vehicle used for transportation 
except as permitted on a motor vehicle,  boat,  vessel,  aircraft,  or other vehicle used for 
transportation that is operated in accordance with Section 26200 of the Business and 
Professions Code and while no persons under the age of 21 years are present. 
(b)  For purposes of this section,  "day care center" has the same meaning as in Section 1596. 76. 
(c)  For purposes of this section,  "smoke" means to  inhale,  exhale,  burn,  or carry any lighted or 
heated device or pipe,  or any other lighted or heated marijuana or marijuana product intended 
for inhalation,  whether natural or synthetic,  in any manner or in any form.  "Smoke" includes the 
use of an electronic smoking device that creates an aerosol or vapor,  in any manner or in any 
form,  or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of 
smoking in a place. 
(d)  For purposes of this section,  "volatile solvent" means volatile organic compounds, 
including: (1)  explosive gases,  such as Butane, Propane, Xylene,  Styrene,  Gasoline, Kerosene, 
02 or H2;  and (2)  dangerous poisons,  toxins,  or carcinogens,  such as Methanol,  Jso-propyl 
Alcohol, Methylene Chloride, Acetone, Benzene,  Toluene,  and Tri-chloro-ethylene. 
(e)  For purposes of this section,  "youth center" has the same meaning as in Section 11353.1. 
(/)  Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to amend,  repeal,  affect,  restrict,  or 
preempt laws pertaining to  the  Compassionate Use Act of 1996. 

11362.4. 
(a) A person who engages in the conduct described in paragraph (I) of subdivision (a)  of Section 
11362.3 is guilty of an infraction punishable by no more than a one hundred dollar ($100) fine; 
provided,  however,  that persons under the age of 18 shall instead be required to  complete four 
hours of a drug education program or counseling,  and up to  10 hours of community service,  over 

7 

a period not to  exceed 60 days once the drug education program or counseling and community 
service opportunity are made available to  the person. 
(b) A person who engages in the conduct described in paragraphs (2)  through (4)  of subdivision 
(a)  of Section 113 62. 3 shall be guilty of an irifraction punishable by no more than a two hundred 
and fifty dollar ($250) fine,  unless such activity is otherwise permitted by state and local law; 
provided, however,  that persons under the age of 18 shall instead be required to  complete four 
hours of drug education or counseling,  and up to 20 hours of comniunity service,  over a period 
not to  exceed 90 days once the drug education program or counseling and community service 
opportunity are made available to  the person. 
(c) A person who engages in the conduct described in paragraph (5)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 
11362.3 shall be subject to  the same punishment as provided under subdivisions (c)  or (d)  of 
Section 11357. 
( d) A person who engages in the conduct described in paragraph (6)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 
113 62. 3 shall be subject to punishment under Section 113 79. 6. 
(e) A person who violates the restrictions in subdivision (a)  of Section 11362.2 is guilty of an 
infraction punishable by no more than a two hundred and fifty dollar ($25 0) fine. 
(!)  Notwithstanding subdivision (e),  a person under the age of 18 who violates the restrictions in 
subdivision (a)  of Section 11362.2 shall be punished under subdivision (a)  of Section 11358. 
(g)(l)  The drug education program or counseling hours required by this section shall be 
mandatory unless the court makes a finding that such a program or counseling is unnecessary 
for the person or that a drug education program or counseling is unavailable. 
(2)  The drug education program required by this section for persons under the age of 18 must be 
free to participants and provide at least four hours of group discussion or instruction based on 
science and evidence-based principles and practices specific to  the use and abuse of marijuana 
and other controlled substances. 
(h)  Upon  a finding of good cause,  the court may extend the time for a person to  complete the 
drug education or counseling,  and community service required under this section. 

11362.45. 
Nothing in section 113 62.1  shall be construed or interpreted to amend,  repeal,  affect,  restrict,  or 
preempt: 
(a)  Laws making it unlawful to  drive or operate a vehicle,  boat,  vessel,  or aircraft,  while 
smoking,  ingesting,  or impaired by,  marijuana or marijuana products, including,  but not limited 
to,  subdivision (e)  of Section 23152 of the  Vehicle  Code,  or the penalties prescribed for violating 
those laws. 
(b)  Laws prohibiting the sale,  administering, furnishing,  or giving away of marijuana,  marijuana 
products,  or marijuana accessories,  or the offering to sell,  administer, furnish,  or give away 
marijuana, marijuana products,  or marijuana accessories to  a person younger than 21 years of 
age. 
(c)  Laws prohibiting a person younger than 21 years of age from engaging in any of the actions 
or conduct otherwise permitted under Section 113 62.1. 
(d)  Laws pertaining to smoking or ingesting marijuana or marijuana products on the grounds of, 
or within,  any facility or institution under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation or the Division of Juvenile Justice,  or on the grounds of, or within,  any other 
facility or institution referenced in Section 4573 of the Penal Code. 

8 

(e) Laws providing that it would constitute negligence or professional malpractice to  undertake 
any task while impaired from smoking or ingesting marijuana or marijuana products. 
(j)  The rights and obligations of public and private employers to maintain a drug and alcohol 
free workplace or require an employer to permit or accommodate the use,  consumption, 
possession,  transfer,  display,  transportation, sale,  or growth of marijuana in the workplace,  or 
affect the ability of employers to have policies prohibiting the use of marijuana by employees 
and prospective employees,  or prevent employers from complying with state or federal law. 
(g)  The ability of a state or local government agency to prohibit or restrict any of the actions or 
conduct otherwise permitted under Section 11362.1 within a building owned,  leased,  or occupied 
by the state or local government agency. 
(h)  The ability of an individual or private entity to prohibit or restrict any of the actions or 
conduct otherwise permitted under Section 113 62.1  on the individual's or entity's privately 
owned property. 
(i) Laws pertaining to  the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. 

SECTION 5.  USE OF MARIJUANA FOR MEDICAL PURPOSES. 

Sections 11362.712, 11362.713, 11362.84 and 11362.85 are added to the Health and Safety 
Code, and 11362.755 of the Health and Safety Code is amended to read: 

11362.712. 
(a)  Commencing on January 1,  2018,  a qualified patient must possess a physician's 
recommendation that complies with Article 25 (commencing with Section 2525) of Chapter 5 of 
Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code.  Failure to  comply with this requirement shall 
not,  however,  affect any of the protections provided to patients or their primary caregivers by 
Section 113 62. 5. 
(b) A  county health department or the county's designee shall develop protocols to ensure that, 
commencing upon January 1,  2018,  all identification cards issued pursuant to Section 11362. 71 
are supported by a physician's recommendation that complies with Article 25 (commencing with 
Section 2525) of Chapter 5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code. 

11362. 713. 
(a)  Information identifying the names,  addresses,  or social security numbers of patients,  their 
medical conditions,  or the names of their primary caregivers,  received and contained in the 
records of the Department of Public Health and by any county public health department are 
hereby deemed  "medical information" within the meaning of the Confidentiality of Medical 
Information Act (Civil Code§ 56,  et seq.) and shall not be disclosed by the Department or by any 
county public health deparhnent except in accordance with the restrictions on disclosure of 
individually identifiable information under the Confidentiality of Medical Iriformation Act. 
(b)  Within 24 hours of receiving any request to disclose the name,  address,  or social security 
number of a patient,  their medical condition,  or the name of their primary caregiver,  the 
Department of Public Health or any county public health agency shall contact the patient and 
inform the patient of the request and if the request was made in writing,  a copy of the request. 
(c)  Notwithstanding Section 56.10 of the Civil Code,  neither the Department of Public Health, 
nor any county public health agency,  shall disclose,  nor shall they be ordered by agency or court 
to  disclose,  the names,  addresses,  or social security numbers of patients,  their medical 

9 

conditions,  or the names of their primary caregivers, sooner than the 10th day after which the 
patient whose records are sought to  be disclosed has been contacted. 
(d) No identification card application system or database used or maintained by the Department 
of Public Health or by any county department of public health or the county's designee as 
provided in Section 113 62. 71  shall contain any personal information of any qualified patient, 
including but not limited to,  the patient's name,  address, social security number,  medical 
conditions,  or the names of their primary caregivers.  Such an application system or database 
· may only contain a unique user identification number,  and when that number is entered,  the only 
information that may be provided is whether the card is valid or invalid. 

11362.755. 
(a)  The department shall establish application and renewal fees  for persons seeking to  obtain or 
renew identification cards that are sufficient to  cover the expenses incurred by the department, 
including the startup cost, the cost of reduced fees for Medi  Cal beneficiaries in accordance with 
subdivision (b), the cost of identifying and developing a cost effective Internet Web based 
system, and the cost of maintaining the 24  hour toll  free telephone number. Each county health 
department or the county's designee may charge an additional a fee for all costs incurred by the 
county or the county's designee for administering the program pursuant to this article. 
(b) In no event shall the amount of the fee charged by a county health department exceed $100 
per application or renewal. 
(c)  Upon satisfactory proof of participation and eligibility in the Medi-Cal program, a Medi-Cal 
beneficiary shall receive a 50 percent reduction in the fees established pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Upon satisfactory proof that a qualified patient,  or the legal guardian of a qualified patient 
under the age of 18,  is a medically indigent adult who is eligible for and participates in the 
County Medical Sen;ices Program,  the fee established pursuant to  this section shall be waived. 
(e)  In the event the fees charged and collected by a county health department are not sufficient to 
pay for the administrative costs incurred in discharging the county health department's duties 
with respect to the mandatory identification card system,  the Legislature,  upon request by the 
county health department,  shall reimburse the county health department for those reasonable 
administrative costs in excess of the fees charged and collected by the county health department. 

11362.84. 
The status and conduct of a qualified patient who acts in accordance with the Compassionate 
Use Act shall not,  by itself, be used to  restrict or abridge custodial or parental rights to minor 
children in any action or proceeding under the jurisdiction of family or juvenile court. 

11362.85. 
Upon a determination by the California Attorney General that the federal schedule of controlled 
substances has been amended to reclassify or declassify marijuana,  the Legislature may amend 
or repeal the provisions of the Health and Safety Code,  as necessary,  to  conform state law to 
such changes in federal law. 

SECTION 6.  MARIJUANA REGULATION AND SAFETY. 

Division 10 is hereby added to the Business and Professions Code to rea_d  as  follows: 

10 

Division 10. Marijuana 

Chapter 1.  General Provisions and Definitions 

26000. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this division is to  establish a comprehensive system to  control and 
regulate the cultivation,  distribution,  transport,  storage,  manufacturing, processing,  and sale of 
nonmedical marijuana and marijuana products for adults 21 years of age and over. 
(b)  In the furtherance of subdivision (a),  this division expands the power and duties of the 
existing state agencies responsible for controlling and regulating the medical cannabis industry 
under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 to  include the power and duty to  control and regulate the 
commercial nonmedical marijuana industry. 
(c)  The Legislature may,  by majority vote,  enact laws to  implement this division, provided such 
laws are consistent with the purposes and intent of the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of 
Marijuana Act. 

26001. 
For purposes of this division,  the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Applicant" means the following: 
(1)  The owner or owners of a proposed licensee.  "Owner" means all persons having (A)  an 
aggregate ownership interest (other than a security interest,  lien,  or encumbrance) of 20 percent 
or more in  the licensee and (B)  the power to direct or cause to  be directed,  the management or 
control of the licensee. 
(2) If the applicant is a publicly traded company,  "owner" includes the chief executive officer 
and any member of the board of directors and any person or entity with an aggregate ownership 
interest in the company of 20 percent or more.  If the applicant is a nonprofit entity,  "owner" 
means both the chief executive officer and any member of the board of directors. 
(b)  "Bureau" means the Bureau of Marijuana  Control within the Department of Consumer 
Affairs. 
(c)  "Child resistant" means designed or constructed to  be significantly difficult for children 
under five years of age to  open,  and not difficult for normal adults to use properly. 
(d)  "Commercial marijuana activity" includes the cultivation, possession,  manufacture, 
distribution, processing, storing,  laboratory testing,  labeling,  transportation,  distribution, 
delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products as provided for in this division. 
(e)  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing,  harvesting,  drying,  curing, 
grading,  or trimming of marijuana. 
(!)  "Customer" means a natural person 21 years of age or over. 
(g)  "Day care center" shall have the same meaning as in Section 1596. 76 of the Health and 
Safety Code. 
(h)  "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to  a 
customer.  "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and 
controlled by the retailer,  or independently licensed under this division,  that enables customers 
to  arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or 
marijuana products. 
(i)  "Director" means the Director of the Department of Consumer Affairs. 

11 

OJ  "Distribution" means the procurement, sale,  and transport of marijuana and marijuana 
products between entities licensed pursuant to  this division. 
(k)  "Fund" means the Marijuana  Control Fund established pursuant to Section 26210. 
(l)  "Kind" means applicable type or designation regarding a particular marijuana variant or 
marijuana product type,  including,  but not limited to,  strain name or other grower trademark,  or 
growing area designation. 
(m)  "License" means a state license issued under this division. 
(n)  "Licensee " means any person or entity holding a license under this division. 
( o)  "Licensing authority" means the state agency responsible for the issuance,  renewal,  or 
reinstatement of the license,  or the state agency authorized to  take disciplinary action against the 
· licensee. 
(p)  "Local jurisdiction" means a city,  county,  or city and county. 
(q)  "Manufacture" means to compound,  blend,  extract,  infuse,  or otherwise make or prepare a 
marijuana product. 
(r)  "Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation,  or 
compounding of marijuana or marijuana products either directly or indirectly or by extraction 
methods,  or independently by means of chemical synthesis,  or by a combination of extraction and 
chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages marijuana or marijuana 
products or labels or re-labels its container,  that holds a state license pursuant to  this division. 
(s)  "Marijuana" has the same meaning as in Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code, 
except that it does not include marijuana that is cultivated, processed,  transported,  distributed, 
or sold for medical purposes under Chapter 3. 5 of Division 8. 
(t)  "Marijuana accessories" has the same meaning as in Section 11018.2 of the Health and 
Safety Code. 
(u)  "Marijuana products" has the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety 
Code,  except that it does not include marijuana products manufactured, processed,  transported, 
distributed,  or sold for medical purposes under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(v)  "Nursery" means a licensee that produces only clones,  immature plants, seeds,  and other 
agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation,  and cultivation of 
marijuana. 
(w)  "Operation" means any act for which licensure is required under the provisions of this 
division,  or any commercial transfer of marijuana or 1narijuana products. 
(x)  "Package" means any container or receptacle used for holding marijuana or marijuana 
products. 
(y)  "Person" includes any individual, firm,  co-partnership, joint venture,  association, 
corporation,  limited liability company,  estate,  trust,  business trust,  receiver,  syndicate,  or any 
other group or combination acting as a unit,  and the plural as well as the singular. 
(z)  "Purchaser" means the customer who is engaged in a transaction with a licensee for 
purposes of obtaining marijuana or marijuana products. 
(aa)  "Sell, "  "sale, " and "to sell" include any transaction whereby, for any consideration,  title 
to  marijuana is transferred from one person to  another,  and includes the delivery of marijuana 
or marijuana products pursuant to  an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or 
receiving an order for the same,  but does not include the return of marijuana or marijuana 
products by a licensee to  the licensee from whom such marijuana or marijuana product was 
purchased. 

12 

(bb)  "Testing service" means a laboratory,facility,  or entity in  the state,  that offers or performs 
tests of marijuana or marijuana products,  including the equipment provided by such laboratory, 
facility,  or entity,  and that is both of the following: 
(1) Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in 
commercial marijuana activity in the state. 
(2)  Registered with the Department of Public Health. 
(cc)  "Unique identifier" means an alphanumeric code or designation used for reference to a 
specific plant on a licensed premises. 
(dd)  "Unreasonably impracticable" means that the measures necessary to  comply with the 
regulations require such a high investment of risk,  money,  time,  or any other resource or asset, 
that the operation of a marijuana establishment is not worthy of being carried out in practice by 
a reasonably prudent business person. 
(ee)  "Youth center" shall have the same meaning as in Section 11353.1 of the Health and Safety 
Code. 

Chapter 2.  Administration 

26010. 
(a)  The Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulation established in Section 19302 in  Chapter 3.5 of 
Division 8 is hereby renamed the Bureau of Marijuana Control.  The director shall administer 
and enforce the provisions of this division in addition to  the provisions of Chapter 3. 5 of 
Division 8.  The director shall have the same power and authority as provided by subdivisions 
(b)  and (c)  of Section 19302.1 for purposes of this division. 
(b)  The bureau and the director shall succeed to and are vested with all the duties, powers, 
purposes, responsibilities,  and jurisdiction vested in  the Bureau of Medical Marijuana 
Regulation under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(c)  In addition to  the powers, duties, purposes,  responsibilities,  and jurisdiction referenced in 
subdivision (b),  the bureau shall heretofore have the power,  duty, purpose,  responsibility,  and 
jurisdiction to  regulate commercial marijuana activity as provided in  this division. 
(d)  Upon the effective date of this section,  whenever "Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulation" 
appears in any statute,  regulation,  or contract,  or in any other code,  it shall be construed to refer 
to  the bureau. 

26011. 
Neither the chief of the bureau nor any member of the Marijuana Control Appeals Panel 
established under Section 26040 shall have nor do  any of the following: 
(a)  Receive any commission or profit whatsoever,  directly or indirectly, from any person 
applying for or receiving any license or permit under this division or Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(b)  Engage or have any interest in the sale or any insurance covering a licensee's business or 
premises. 
(c)  Engage or have any interest in the sale of equipment for use upon the premises of a licensee 
engaged in commercial marijuana activity. 
( d)Knowingly solicit any licensee for the purchase of tickets for benefits or contributions for 
benefits. 
(e) Knowingly request any licensee to donate or receive money,  or any other thing of value, for 
the benefit of any person whatsoever. 

13 

26012. 
(a) It being a matter of statewide concern,  except as otherwise authorized in this division: 
(1)  The Department of Consumer Affairs shall have the exclusive authority to  create,  issue, 
renew,  discipline,  suspend,  or revoke licenses for the transportation,  storage unrelated to 
manufacturing activities,  distribution,  and sale of marijuana within the state. 
(2)  The Department of Food and Agriculture shall administer the provisions of this division 
related to and associated with the cultivation of marijuana.  The Department of Food and 
Agriculture shall have the authority to  create,  issue,  and suspend or revoke cultivation licenses 
for violations of this division. 
(3)  The Department of Public Health shall administer the provisions of this division related to 
and associated with the manefacturing and testing of marijuana.  The Department of Public 
Health shall have the authority to  create,  issue,  and suspend or revoke manufacturing and 
testing licenses for violations of this division. 
(b)  The licensing authorities and the bureau shall have the authority to collect fees in connection 
with activities they regulate concerning marijuana.  The bureau may create licenses in addition 
to  those identified in this division that the bureau deems necessary to effectuate its duties under 
this division. 
(c) Licensing authorities shall begin issuing licenses under this division by January 1,  2018. 

26013. 
(a)  Licensing authorities shall make and prescribe reasonable rules and regulations as may be 
necessary to  implement,  administer and enforce their respective duties under this division in 
accordance with Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 
of the Government Code.  Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the purposes and 
intent of the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act. 
(b)  Licensing authorities may prescribe,  adopt,  and enforce any emergency regulations as 
necessary to  implement,  administer and enforce their respective duties under this division.  Any 
emergency regulation prescribed,  adopted or enforced pursuant to  this section shall be adopted 
in accordance with Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 
2 of the Government Code,  and, for purposes of that chapter,  including Section 11349. 6 of the 
Government Code,  the adoption of the regulation is an emergency and shall be considered by the 
Office of Administrative Law as necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, 
health and safety,  and general welfare. 
(c)  Regulations issued under this division shall be necessary to  achieve the purposes of this 
division,  based on best available evidence,  and shall mandate only commercially feasible 
procedures,  technology;  or other requirements,  and shall not unreasonably restrain or inhibit the 
development of alternative procedures or technology to  achieve the same substantive 
requirements,  nor shall such regulations make compliance unreasonably impracticable. 

26014. 
(a)  The  bureau shall convene an advisory committee to advise the bureau and licensing 
authorities on the development of standards and regulations pursuant to  this division,  including 
best practices and guidelines that protect public health and safety while ensuring a regulated 
environment for commercial marijuana activity that does not impose such unreasonably 

14 

impracticable barriers so as to perpetuate,  rather than reduce and eliminate,  the illicit market 
for marijuana. 
(b)  The advisory committee members shall include,  but not be limited to,  representatives of the 
marijuana industry,  representatives of labor organizations,  appropriate state and local agencies, 
public health experts,  and other subject matter experts,  including representatives from the 
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control,  with expertise in regulating commercial activity for 
adult-use intoxicating substances.  The advisory committee members shall be determined by the 
director. 
(c)  Commencing on January 1,  2019,  the advisory committee shall publish an annual public 
report describing its activities including,  but not limited to,  the recommendations the advisory 
committee made to the bureau and licensing authorities during the immediately preceding 
calendar year and whether those recommendations were implemented by the bureau or licensing 
authorities. 

26015. 
A  licensing authority may make or cause to  be made such investigation as it deems necessary to 
carry out its duties under this division. 

26016. 
For any hearing held pursuant to  this division,  except a hearing held under Chapter 4,  a 
licensing authority may delegate the power to hear and decide to an administrative law judge. 
Any hearing before an administrative law judge shall be pursuant to  the procedures,  rules,  and 
limitations prescribed in Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of 
Title 2 of the Government Code. 

26017. 
In any hearing before a licensing authority pursuant to this division,  the licensing authority may 
pay any person appearing as a witness at the hearing at the request of the licensing authority 
pursuant to  a subpoena,  his or her actual,  necessary,  and reasonable travel, food,  and lodging 
expenses,  not to  exceed the amount authorized for state employees. 

26018. 
A  licensing authority may on its own motion at any time before a penalty assessment is placed 
into effect,  and without any further proceedings,  review the penalty,  but such review shall be 
limited to  its reduction. 

Chapter 3. Enforcement 

26030. 
Grounds for disciplinary action include: 
(a)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this division or any rule or regulation adopted 
pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Conduct that constitutes grounds for denial oflicensure pursuant to  Chapter 3 (commencing 
with Section 490) of Division 1.5. 
(c) Any other grounds contained in regulations adopted by a licensing authority pursuant to this 
division. 

15 

(d)  Failure to  comply with any state law including,  but not limited to,  the payment of taxes as 
required under the Revenue and Taxation Code,  except as provided for in this division or other 
California law. 
(e)  Knowing violations of any state or local law,  ordinance,  or regulation conferring worker 
protections or legal rights on the employees of a licensee. 
(f) Failure to  comply with the requirement of a local ordinance regulating commercial 
marijuana activity. 
(g)  The intentional and knowing sale of marijuana or marijuana products by a licensee to a 
person under the legal age to purchase or possess. 

26031. 
Each licensing authority may suspend or revoke licenses,  after proper notice and hearing to  the 
licensee,  if the licensee is found to have committed any of the acts or omissions constituting 
grounds for disciplinary action.  The disciplinary proceedings under this chapter shall be 
conducted in accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500) of Part 1 of Division 
3 of Title 2 of the  Government Code,  and the director of each licensing authority shall have all 
the powers granted therein. 

26032. 
Each licensing authority may take disciplinary action against a licensee for any violation of this 
division when the violation was committed by the licensee's agent or employee while acting on 
behalf of the licensee or engaged in commercial marijuana activity. 

26033. 
Upon suspension or revocation of a license,  the licensing authority shall iriform the bureau.  The 
bureau shall then iriform all other licensing authorities. 

26034. 
Accusations against licensees under this division shall be filed within the same time limits as 
specified in Section 19 314 or as otherwise provided by law, 

26035. 
(a)  The director shall designate the persons employed by the Department of Consumer Affairs 
for purposes of the administration and enforcement of this division.  The director shall ensure 
that a sufficient number of employees are qualified peace officers for purposes of enforcing this 
division. 

26036. 
Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to supersede or limit state agencies from exercising 
their existing enforcement authority,  including,  but not limited to,  under the Fish and Game 
Code,  the Food and Agricultural Code,  the Government Code,  the Health and Safety Code,  the 
Public Resources Code,  the Water Code,  or the application of those laws. 

26037. 
(a)  The actions of a licensee,  its employees,  and its agents that are:  (1) permitted under a license 
issued under this division and any applicable local ordinances; and (2)  conducted in accordance 

16 

with the requirements of this division and regulations adopted pursuant to  this division,  are not 
unlawful under state law and shall not be an offense subject to arrest, prosecution,  or other 
sanction under state law,  or be subject to a civil fine or be a basis for seizure or forfeiture of 
assets under state law. 
(b)  The actions of a person who,  in good faith,  allows his or her property to be used by a 
licensee,  its employees,  and its agents,  as permitted pursuant to a state license and any 
applicable local ordinances,  are not unlawful under state law and shall not be an offense subject 
to arrest, prosecution,  or other sanction under state law,  or be subject to a civil fine or be a basis 
for seizure or forfeiture of assets under state law. 

26038. 
(a) A person engaging in commercial marijuana activity without a license required by this 
division shall be subject to  civil penalties of up to  three times the amount of the license fee for 
each violation,  and the court may order the destruction of marijuana associated with that 
violation in accordance with Section 11479 of the Health and Safety Code.  Each day of 
operation shall constitute a separate violation of this section.  All civil penalties imposed and 
collected pursuant to  this section by a licensing authority shall be deposited into the General 
Fund except as provided in subdivision (b). 
(b) If an action for civil penalties is brought against a licensee pursuant to  this division by the 
Attorney General on behalf of the people,  the penalty collected shall be deposited into the 
General Fund.  If the action is brought by a district attorney or county counsel,  the penalty shall 
first be used to  reimburse the district attorney or county counsel for the costs of bringing the 
action for civil penalties, with the remainder,  if any,  to  be deposited into the General Fund. If the 
action is brought by a city attorney or city prosecutor,  the penalty collected shall first be used to 
reimburse the city attorney or city prosecutor for the costs of bringing the action for civil 
penalties,  with the remainder,  if any,  to  be deposited into the General Fund. 
(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  criminal penalties shall continue to  apply to  an unlicensed 
person engaging in commercial marijuana activity in  violation of this division. 

Chapter 4.  Appeals 

26040. 
(a)  There is established in state government a Marijuana Control Appeals Panel which shall 
consist of three members appointed by the Governor and subject to confirmation by a majority 
vote of all of the members elected to  the Senate.  Each member,  at the time of his or her initial 
appointment, shall be a resident of a different county from the one in which either of the other 
members resides.  Members of the panel shall receive an annual salary as provided for by 
Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 11550) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government 
Code. 
(b)  The members of the panel may be removed from office by the Governor,  and the Legislature 
shall have the power,  by a majority vote of all members elected to  each house,  to remove any 
member from office for dereliction of duty,  corruption or incompetency. 
(c) A  concurrent resolution for the removal of any member of the panel may be introduced in  the 
Legislature only if five Members of the Senate,  or ten Members of the Assembly, join as authors. 

17 

26041. 
All personnel of the panel shall be appointed,  employed,  directed,  and controlled by the panel 
consistent with state civil service requirements.  The director shall furnish the equipment, 
supplies,  and housing necessary for the authorized activities of the panel and shall perform such 
other mechanics of administration as the panel and the director may agree upon. 

26042. 
The panel shall adopt procedures for appeals similar to  the procedures used in Articles 3 and 4 
in Chapter 1.5 in Division 9 of the Business and Professions Code.  Such procedures shall be 
adopted in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (Government Code,  Title 2, 
Division 3,  section 11340 et seq.). 

26043. 
(a)  When any person aggrieved thereby appeals from a decision of the bureau or any licensing 
authority ordering any penalty assessment,  issuing,  denying,  transferring,  conditioning, 
suspending or revoking any license provided for under this division,  the panel shall review the 
decision subject to such limitations as may be imposed by the Legislature. In such cases,  the 
panel shall not receive evidence in addition to  that considered by the bureau or the licensing 
authority. 
(b)  Review by the panel of a decision of the bureau or a licensing authority shall be limited to  the 
following questions: 
(1)  Whether the bureau or any licensing authority has proceeded without or in excess of its 
jurisdiction. 
(2)  Whether the bureau or any licensing authority has proceeded in the manner required by law. 
(3)  Whether the decision is supported by the findings. 
( 4)  Whether the findings are supported by substantial evidence in the light of the whole record. 

26044. 
(a)  In appeals where the panel finds that there is relevant evidence which,  in the exercise of 
reasonable diligence,  could not have been produced or which was improperly excluded at the 
hearing before the bureau or licensing authority,  it may enter an order remanding the matter to 
the bureau or licensing authority for reconsideration in the light of such evidence. 
(b)  Except as provided in subdivision (a),  in all appeals,  the panel shall enter an order either 
affirming or reversing the decision of the bureau or licensing authority.  When the order reverses 
the decision of the bureau or licensing authority,  the board may direct the reconsideration of the 
matter in the light of its order and may direct the bureau or licensing authority to  take such 
further action as is specially enjoined upon it by law,  but the order shall not limit or control in 
.any way the discretion vested by law in the bureau or licensing authority. 

26045. 
Orders of the panel shall be subject to judicial review under Section 1094. 5 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure upon petition by the bureau or licensing authority or any party aggrieved by such 
order. 

18 

Chapter 5.  Licensing 

26050. 
(a)  The license classification pursuant to  this division shall,  at a minimum,  be as follows: 
(1)  Type  I  =  Cultivation; Specialty outdoor; Small. 
(2)  Type  IA  ==  Cultivation; Specialty indoor; Small. 
(3)  Type IB =  Cultivation; Specialty mixed-light; Small. 
(4)  Type 2  = Cultivation;  Outdoor; Small. 
(5)  Type 2A  =  Cultivation; Indoor; Small. 
(6)  Type 2B =  Cultivation; Mixed-light; Small. 
(7)  Type 3  =  Cultivation;  Outdoor; Medium. 
(8)  Type 3A  =  Cultivation; Indoor; Medium. 
(9)  Type 3B  =  Cultivation; Mixed-light; Medium. 
(10)  Type 4  =  Cultivation; Nursery. 
(11)  Type 5  =  Cultivation;  Outdoor; Large. 
(12)  Type 5A =Cultivation; Indoor; Large. 
(13)  Type 5B =  Cultivation; Mixed-light; Large. 
(14)  Type 6  =  Manufacturer 1. 
(15)  Type  7 =  Manufacturer 2. 
(16)  Type 8  =  Testing. 
(17)  Type 10 =  Retailer. 
(18)  Type 11  = Distributor. 
(19)  Type 12 =Microbusiness. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this division shall bear a clear designation indicating that the 
license is for commercial marijuana activity as distinct from commercial medical cannabis 
activity licensed under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8.  Examples of such a designation include,  but 
are not limited to,  "Type 1 -Nonmedical, "or "Type INM" 
(c)  A  license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid for 12 months from the date of 
issuance.  The license may be renewed annually. 
( d)  Each licensing authority shall establish procedures for the issuance and renewal of licenses. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subdivision (c),  a licensing authority may issue a temporary license for a 
period of less than 12 months.  This subdivision shall cease to  be operable on January 1,  2019. 

26051. 
(a)  In determining whether to grant,  deny,  or renew a license authorized under this division,  a 
licensing authority shall consider factors reasonably related to  the determination,  including, but 
not limited to,  whether it is reasonably foreseeable that issuance,  denial,  or renewal of the 
license could: 
(1)  allow unreasonable restrains on competition by creation or maintenance of unlawful 
monopoly power; 
(2) perpetuate the presence of an illegal market for marijuana or marijuana products in the state 
or out of the state; 
(3)  encourage underage use or adult abuse of marijuana or marijuana products,  or illegal 
diversion of marijuana or marijuana products out of the state; 
(4)  result in  an excessive concentration of licensees in a given city,  county,  or both; 

19 

(5) present an unreasonable risk of minors being exposed to marijuana or marijuana products; 
or 
(6)  result in violations of any environmental protection laws. 
(b) A  licensing authority may deny a license or renewal of a license based upon the 
considerations in subdivision (a). 
(c)  For purposes of this section,  "excessive concentration" means when the premises for a retail 
license,  microbusiness license,  or a license issued under Section 26070.5 is located in an area 
where either of the following conditions exist: 
(])  The ratio of a licensee to population in the census tract or census division in which the 
applicant premises are located exceeds the ratio of licensees to population in the county in which 
the applicant premises are located,  unless denial of the application would unduly limit the 
development of the legal market so as to perpetuate the illegal market for marijuana or 
marijuana products. 
(2)  The ratio of retail licenses,  micro business licenses,  or licenses under Section 26070. 5 to 
population in the census tract,  division or jurisdiction exceeds that allowable by local ordinance 
adopted under Section 26200. 

26052. 
(a)  No licensee shall perform any of the following acts,  or permit any such acts to  be performed 
by any employee,  agent,  or contractor of such licensee: 
(1)  Make any contract in restraint of trade in violation of Section 16600; 
(2)  Farm a trust or other prohibited organization in restraint of trade in violation of Section 
16720; 
(3)  Make a sale or contract for the sale of marijuana or marijuana products,  or to fix a price 
charged therefor,  or discount from,  or rebate upon,  such price,  on the condition,  agreement or 
understanding that the consumer or purchaser thereof shall not use or deal in the goods, 
merchandise,  machinery, supplies,  commodities,  or services of a competitor or competitors of 
such seller,  where the effect of such sale,  contract,  condition,  agreement or understanding may 
be to substantially lessen competition or tend to  create a monopoly in any line of trade or 
commerce; 
( 4)  Sell any marijuana or marijuana products at less than cost for the purpose of injuring 
competitors,  destroying competition,  or misleading or deceiving purchasers or prospective 
purchasers; 
(5)  Discriminate between different sections,  communities,  or cities or portions thereof, or 
between different locations in such sections,  communities,  cities or portions thereof in this state, 
by selling or furnishing marijuana or marijuana products at a lower price in one section, 
community,  or city or 'any portion thereof,  or in one location in such section,  community,  or city 
or any portion thereof, than in another, for the purpose of injuring competitors or destroying 
competition; or 
(6)  Sell any marijuana or marijuana products at less than the cost thereof to such vendor,  or to 
give away any article or product for the purpose of injuring competitors or destroying 
competition. 
(b)  Any person who,  either as director,  officer or agent of any firm or corporation,  or as agent of 
any person,  violates the provisions of this chapter,  assists or aids,  directly or indirectly,  in such 
violation is responsible therefor equally with the person, firm or corporation for which such 
person acts. 

20 

(c) A  licensing authority may enforce this section by appropriate regulation. 
(d) Any person or trade association may bring an action to enjoin and restrain any violation of 
this section for the recovery of damages. 

26053. 
(a)  The  bureau and licensing authorities may issue licenses under this division to persons or 
entities that hold licenses under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  a person or entity that holds a state testing license under 
this division or Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 is prohibited from licensurefor any other activity, 
except testing,  as authorized under this division. 
(c) Except as provided in subdivision (b),  a person or entity may apply for and be issued more 
than one license under this division. 

26054. 
(a) A  licensee shall not also be licensed as a retailer of alcoholic beverages under Division 9 or 
of tobacco products. 
(b)  No licensee under this division shall be located within a 600-foot radius of a school 
providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12,  day care center,  or youth 
center that is in existence at the time the license is issued,  unless a licensing authority or a local 
jurisdiction specifies a different radius.  The distance specified in this section shall be measured 
in  the same manner as provided in paragraph (c)  of Section 11362. 768 of the Health and Safety 
Code unless otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  It shall be lawful under state and local law,  and shall not be a violation of state or local law, 
for a business engaged in the manufacture of marijuana accessories to possess,  transport, 
purchase or otherwise obtain small amounts of marijuana or marijuana products as necessary to 
conduct research and development related to such marijuana accessories, provided such 
marijuana and marijuana products are obtained from a person or entity licensed under this 
division or Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 permitted to provide or deliver such marijuana or 
marijuana products. 

26054.1 
(a)  No licensing authority shall issue or renew a license to any person that cannot demonstrate 
continuous California residency from or before January 1,  2015.  In the case of an applicant or 
licensee that is an entity,  the entity shall not be considered a resident if any person controlling 
the entity cannot demonstrate continuous California residency from and before January 1,  2015. 
(b)  Subdivision (a)  shall cease to  be operable on December 31,  2019 unless reenacted prior 
thereto by the Legislature. 

26054.2 
(a) A  licensing authority shall give priority in issuing licenses under this division to  applicants 
that can demonstrate to  the authority's satisfaction that the applicant operated in compliance 
with the Compassionate Use Act and its implementing laws before September 1,  2016,  or 
currently operates in compliance with Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(b)  The bureau shall request that local jurisdictions identify for the bureau potential applicants 
for licensure based on the applicants' prior operation in the local jurisdiction in compliance 
with state law,  including the Compassionate Use Act and its implementing laws,  and any 

21 

applicable local laws.  The bureau shall make the requested information available to  licensing 
authorities. 
(c) In addition to  or in lieu of the information described in subdivision (b),  an applicant may 
furnish other evidence to  demonstrate operation in compliance with the Compassionate Use Act 
or Chapter 3.5 of Division 8.  The bureau and licensing authorities may accept such evidence to 
demonstrate eligibility for the priority provided for in subdivision (a). 
(d)  This section shall cease to  be operable on December 31,  2019 unless otherwise provided by 
law. 

26055. 
(a)  Licensing authorities may issue state licenses only to qualified applicants. 
(b)  Revocation of a state license issued under this division shall terminate the ability of the 
licensee to  operate within California until the licensing authority reinstates or reissues the state 
license. 
(c)  Separate licenses shall be issued for each of the premises of any licensee having more than 
one location,  except as otherwise authorized by law or regulation. 
( d) After issuance or transfer of a license,  no licensee shall change or alter the premises in a 
manner which materially or substantially alters the premises,  the usage of the premises,  or the 
mode or character of business operation conducted from the premises, from the plan contained 
in the diagram on file with the application,  unless and until prior written assent of the licensing 
authority or bureau has been obtained.  For purposes of this section,  material or substantial 
physical changes of the premises,  or in the usage of the premises,  shall include,  but not be 
limited to,  a substantial increase or decrease in the total area of the licensed premises previously 
diagrammed,  or any other physical modification resulting in substantial change in the mode or 
character of business operation. 
(e)  Licensing authorities shall not approve an application for a state license under this division if 
approval of the state license will violate the provisions of any local ordinance or regulation 
adopted in accordance with Section 26200. 

26056. 
An applicant for any type of state license issued pursuant to  this division shall comply with the 
same requirements as set forth in Section 19322 of Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 unless otherwise 
provided by law,  including electronic submission of fingerprint images,  and any other 
requirements imposed by law or a licensing authority,  except as follows: 
(a)  notwithstanding paragraph (2)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 19322 of Chapter 3.5 of Division 
8,  an applicant need not provide documentation that the applicant has obtained a license, permit 
or other authorization to  operate from the local jurisdiction in which the applicant seeks to 
operate; 
(b)  an application for a license under this division shall include evidence that the proposed 
location meets the restriction in subdivision (b)  of Section 26054; and 
(c) for applicants seeking licensure to  cultivate,  distribute,  or manufacture nonmedical 
marijuana or marijuana products,  the application shall also include a detailed description of the 
applicant's operating procedures for all of the following,  as required by the licensing authority: 
(1)  Cultivation. 
(2)  Extraction and infusion methods. 
(3)  The transportation process. 

22 

(4)  The inventory process. 
(5)  Quality control procedures. 
(6)  The source or sources of water the applicant will use for the licensed activities,  including a 
certification that the applicant may use that water legally under state law. 
(d)  The applicant shall provide a complete detailed diagram of the proposed premises wherein 
the license privileges will be exercised,  with sufficient particularity to  enable ready 
determination of the bounds of the premises, showing all boundaries,  dimensions,  entrances and 
exits,  interior partitions,  walls,  rooms,  and common or shared entryways,  and include a brief 
statement or description of the principal activity to  be conducted therein,  and, for licenses 
permitting cultivation,  measurements of the planned canopy including aggregate square footage 
and individual square footage of separate cultivation areas,  if any. 

26056.5. 
The bureau shall devise protocols that each licensing authority shall implement to  ensure 
compliance with state laws and regulations related to environmental impacts,  natural resource 
protection,  water quality,  water supply,  hazardous materials,  and pesticide use in accordance 
with regulations,  including but not limited to,  the California Environmental Quality Act (Public 
Resources Code,  Section 21000,  et seq.),  the California Endangered Species Act (Fish  and Game 
Code,  Section 2800 et.  seq.),  lake or streambed alteration agreements (Fish  and Game Code, 
Section 1600 et.  seq.),  the Clean  Water Act,  the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, 
timber production zones,  wastewater discharge requirements,  and any permit or right necessary 
to divert water. 

26057. 
(a)  The licensing authority shall deny an application if either the applicant,  or the premises for 
which a state license is applied,  do  not qualify for licensure under this division. 
(b)  The  licensing authority may deny the application for licensure or renewal of a state license if 
any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this division,  any rule or regulation adopted 
pursuant to  this division,  or any requirement imposed to protect natural resources,  including,  but 
not limited to, protections for instream flow and water quality. 
(2)  Conduct that constitutes grounds for denial oflicensure under Chapter 2 of Division 1.5, 
except as otherwise specified in this section and Section 26059. 
(3)  Failure to provide information required by the licensing authority. 
(4)  The applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to  the 
qualifications, functions,  or duties of the business or profession for which the application is 
made,  except that if the licensing authority determines that the applicant or licensee is otherwise 
suitable to be issued a license,  and granting the license would not compromise public safety,  the 
licensing authority shall conduct a thorough review of the nature of the crime,  conviction, 
circumstances,  and evidence of rehabilitation of the applicant,  and shall evaluate the suitability 
of the applicant or licensee to  be issued a license based on the evidence found through the 
review. In determining which offenses are substantially related to  the qualifications, functions, 
or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made,  the licensing authority 
shall include,  but not be limited to,  the following: 
(A) A violent felony conviction,  as specified in subdivision (c)  of Section 667.5 of the Penal 
Code. 

23 

(BJ  A serious felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (cJ  of Section 1192. 7 of the Penal 
Code. 
(CJ Afelony conviction involving fraud,  deceit,  or embezzlement. 
(DJ Afelony conviction for hiring,  employing,  or using a minor in transporting,  carrying, selling, 
giving away, preparing for sale,  or peddling,  any controlled substance to  a minor; or selling, 
offering to sell, furnishing,  offering to furnish,  administering,  or giving any controlled substance 
to  a minor. 
(EJ  A felony conviction for drug trafficldng with enhancements pursuant to Sections 113 70. 4 or 
11379.8. 
(5J  Except as provided in subparagraphs (DJ  and (EJ  of paragraph (4J  and notwithstanding 
Chapter 2 of Division 1. 5,  a prior conviction,  where the sentence,  including any term of 
probation,  incarceration,  or supervised release,  is completed, for possession of, possession for 
sale,  sale, manufacture,  transportation,  or cultivation of a controlled substance is not considered 
substantially related,  and shall not be the sole ground for denial of a license.  Conviction for any 
controlled substance felony subsequent to  licensure shall be grounds for revocation of a license 
or denial of the renewal of a license. 
(6J  The applicant,  or any of its officers,  directors,  or owners,  has been subject to fines or 
penalties for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or private lands 
pursuant to Sections 12025 or 12025.1 of the Fish and Game Code. 
(7J  The applicant,  or any of its officers,  directors,  or owners,  has been sanctioned by a licensing 
authority or a city,  county,  or city and county for unauthorized commercial marijuana activities 
or commercial medical cannabis activities,  has had a license revoked under this division or 
Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 in the three years immediately preceding the date the application is 
filed with the licensing authority,  or has been sanctioned under Sections 12025 or 12025. l  of the 
Fish and Game Code. 
(8J  Failure to  obtain and maintain a valid seller's permit required pursuant to Part 1 
(commencing with Section 6001J  of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation  Code. 
(9J  Any other condition specified in law. 

26058. 
Upon the denial of any application for a license,  the licensing authority shall notify the applicant 
in writing. 

26059. 
An applicant shall not be denied a state license if the denial is based solely on any of the 
following: 
(aJ A  conviction or act that is substantially related to  the qualifications, fimctions,  or duties of 
the business or profession for which the application is made for which the applicant or licensee 
has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation pursuant to  Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 
4852.0lJ of Title 6 of Part 3 of the Penal Code. 
(bJ  A conviction that was subsequently dismissed pursuant to Sections 1203.4,  l 203.4a,  or 
1203.41 of the Penal Code or any other provision allowing for dismissal of a conviction. 

24 

Chapter 6.  Licensed Cultivation Sites 

26060. 
(a)  Regulations issued by the Department of Food and Agriculture governing the licensing of 
indoor,  outdoor,  and mixed-light cultivation sites shall apply to  licensed cultivators under this 
division. 
(b)  Standards developed by the Department of Pesticide Regulation,  in consultation with the 
Department of Food and Agriculture, for the use of pesticides in  cultivation,  and maximum 
tolerances for pesticides and other foreign object residue in harvested cannabis shall apply to 
licensed cultivators under this division. 
(c)  The Department of Food and Agriculture shall include conditions in each license requested 
by the Department of Fish and Wildlife and the State Water Resources Control Board to  ensure 
that individual and cumulative effects of water diversion and discharge associated with 
cultivation do  not affect the instream flows needed for fish spawning,  migration,  and rearing, 
and the flows needed to  maintain natural flow variability,  and to  otherwise protect fish,  wildlife, 
fish and wildlife habitat,  and water quality. 
(d)  The regulations promulgated by the Department of Food and Agriculture under this division 
shall,  at a minimum,  address in relation to  commercial marijuana activity,  the same matters 
described in subdivision (e)  of Section 19332 of Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(e)  The Department of Pesticide Regulation,  in consultation with the State  Water Resources 
Control Board,  shall promulgate regulations that require that the application of pesticides or 
other pest control in connection with the indoor,  outdoor,  or mixed light cultivation of marijuana 
meets standards equivalent to Division 6 (commencing with Section 11401) of the Food and 
Agricultural Code and its implementing regulations. 

26061. 
(a)  The state cultivator license types to  be issued by the Department of Food and Agriculture 
under this division shall include Type 1,  Type  IA,  Type  JB,  Type 2,  Type 2A,  Type 2B,  Type 3, 
Type 3A,  Type 3B,  Type 4,  and Type 5,  Type SA,  and Type  SB unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law,  Type 1,  Type  IA,  Type JB,  Type 2,  Type 2A,  Type 2B; 
Type 3,  Type3A,  Type 3B and Type 4 licenses shall provide for the cultivation of marijuana in 
the same amount as the equivalent license type for cultivation of medical cannabis as specified in 
subdivision (g)  of Section 19332 of Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law: 
(1)  Type 5,  or "outdoor, "means for outdoor cultivation using no artificial lighting greater than 
one acre,  inclusive,  of total canopy size on one premises. 
(2)  Type SA,  or "indoor, "means for indoor cultivation using exclusively artificial lighting 
greater than 22, 000 square feet,  inclusive,  of total canopy size on one premises. 
(3)  Type SB,  or "mixed-light," means for cultivation using a combination of natural and 
supplemental artificial lighting at a maximum threshold to  be determined by the licensing 
authority,  greater than 22,000 square feet,  inclusive,  of total canopy size on one premises. 
(d)  No Type 5,  Type 5A,  or Type 5B cultivation licenses may be issued before January 1,  2023. 
(e)  Commencing on January 1,  2023, A  Type 5,  Type 5A,  or Type 5B licensee may apply for and 
hold a Type  6 or Type  7 license and apply for and hold Type 10 license.  A  Type 5,  Type 5A,  or 
Type 5B licensee shall not eligible to  apply for or hold a Type 8,  Type 11,  or Type 12 license. 

25 

26062. 
The Department of Food and Agriculture,  in conjunction with the bureau, shall establish a 
certified organic designation and organic certification program for marijuana and marijuana 
products in the same manner as provided in Section 19332.5 of Chapter 3.5 of Division 8. 

26063. 
(a)  The bureau shall establish standards for recognition of a particular appellation of origin 
applicable to marijuana grown or cultivated in a certain geographical area in California. 
(b)  Marijuana shall not be marketed,  labeled,  or sold as grown in a California county when the 
marijuana was not grown in that county. 
(c)  The name of a California county shall not be used in the labeling,  marketing,  or packaging of 
marijuana products unless the marijuana contained in the product was grown in that county. 

26064. 
Each licensed cultivator shall ensure that the licensed premises do  not pose an unreasonable risk 
of fire or combustion. Each cultivator shall ensure that all lighting,  wiring,  electrical and 
mechanical devices,  or other relevant property is carefully maintained to avoid unreasonable or 
dangerous risk to  the property or others. 

26065. 
An employee engaged in the cultivation of marijuana under this division shall be subject to  Wage 
Order No.  4-2001 of the Industrial Welfare  Commission. 

26066. 
Indoor and outdoor marijuana cultivation by persons and entities licensed under this division 
shall be conducted in accordance with state and local laws related to  land conversion, grading, 
electricity usage,  water usage,  water quality,  woodland and riparian habitat protection, 
agricultural discharges,  and similar matters.  State agencies,  including,  but not limited to,  the 
Board of Forestry and Fire Protection,  the Department of Fish and Wildlife,  the State  Water 
Resources Control Board,  the California regional water quality control boards,  and traditional 
state law enforcement agencies,  shall address environmental impacts of marijuana cultivation 
and shall coordinate when appropriate with cities and counties and their law enforcement 
agencies in enforcement efforts. 

26067. 
(a)  The Department of Food and Agriculture shall establish a Marijuana Cultivation Program to 
be administered by the secretary.  The secretary shall administer this section as it pertains to  the 
cultivation of marijuana.  For purposes of this division,  marijuana is an agricultural product. 
(b) A person or entity shall not cultivate marijuana without first obtaining a state license issued 
by the department pursuant to  this section. 
(c)(l)  The department,  in consultation with,  but not limited to,  the bureau,  the State  Water 
Resources Control Board,  and the Department of Fish and Wildlife,  shall i111,plement a unique 
identification program for marijuana.  In implementing the program,  the department shall 
consider issues including,  but not limited to,  water use and environmental impacts. In 
implementing the program,  the department shall ensure that: 

26 

(A) Individual and cumulative effects of water diversion and discharge associated with 
cultivation do  not affect the instream flows needed for fish spawning,  migration,  and rearing, 
and the flows needed to maintain natural flow variability. If a watershed cannot support 
additional cultivation,  no new plant identifiers will be issued for that watershed. 
(B)  Cultivation will not negatively impact springs,  riparian wetlands and aquatic habitats. 
(2)  The department shall establish a program for the identification of permitted marijuana plants 
at a cultivation site during the cultivation period. A  unique identifier shall be issued for each 
marijuana plant.  The department shall ensure that unique identifiers are issued as quickly as 
possible to  ensure the implementation of this division.  The unique identifier shall be attached at 
the base of each plant or as otherwise required by law or regulation. 
(A)  Unique identifiers will only be issued to  those persons appropriately licensed by this section. 
(B)  Information associated with the assigned unique identifier and licensee shall be included in 
the trace and track program specified in Section 26170. 
(C)  The department may charge a fee to  cover the reasonable costs of issuing the unique 
identifier and monitoring,  tracking,  and inspecting each marijuana plant. 
(D)  The department may promulgate regulations to  implement this section. 
(3)  The department shall take adequate steps to  establish protections against fraudulent unique 
identifiers and limit illegal diversion of unique identifiers to  unlicensed persons. 
(d)  Unique identifiers and associated identifying information administered by local jurisdictions 
shall adhere to  the requirements set by the department and be the equivalent to  those 
administered by the department. 
(e)  (1)  This section does not apply to  the cultivation of marijuana in accordance with Section 
113 62.1  of the Health and Safety Code or the Compassionate Use Act. 
(2)  Subdivision (b)  of this section does not apply to persons or entities licensed under either 
paragraph (3)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 26070 or subdivision (b)  of Section 26070.5. 
(!)  "Department" for purposes of this section means the Department of Food and Agriculture. 

Chapter 7.  Retailers and Distributors 

26070. Retailers and Distributors 
(a)  State licenses to  be issued by the Department of Consumer Affairs are as follows: 
(1)  "Retailer, "for the retail sale and delivery of marijuana or marijuana products to customers. 
(2)  "Distributor," for the distribution of marijuana and marijuana products.  A distributor 
licensee shall be bonded and insured at a minimum level established by the licensing authority. 
(3)  "Microbusiness, "for the cultivation of marijuana on an area less than 10, 000 square feet 
and to  act as a licensed distributor,  Level 1 manufacturer,  and retailer under this division, 
provided such licensee complies with all requirements imposed by this division on licensed 
cultivators,  distributors, Level 1 manufacturers,  and retailers to  the extent the licensee engages 
in such activities.  Microbusiness licenses that authorize cultivation of marijuana shall include 
conditions requested by the Department of Fish and Wildlife and the State  Water Resources 
Control Board to  ensure that individual and cumulative effects of water diversion and discharge 
associated with cultivation do  not affect the instream flows needed for fish spawning,  migration, 
and rearing,  and the flow needed to  maintain flow variability,  and otherwise protect fish, 
wildlife, fish and wildlife habitat,  and water quality. 
(b)  The bureau shall establish minimum security and transportation safety requirements for the 
commercial distribution and delivery of marijuana and marijuana products.  The transportation 

27 

safety standards established by the bureau shall include,  but not be limited to,  minimum 
standards governing the types of vehicles in which marijuana and marijuana products may be 
distributed and delivered and minimum qualifications for persons eligible to  operate such 
vehicles. 
(c) Licensed retailers and microbusinesses,  and licensed nonprofits under Section 26070.5,  shall 
implement security measures reasonably designed to prevent unauthorized entrance into areas 
containing marijuana or marijuana products and theft of marijuana or marijuana products from 
the premises.  These security measures shall include,  but not be limited to,  all of the following: 
(1)  Prohibiting individuals from remaining on the licensee's premises if they are not engaging in 
activity expressly related to the operations of the dispensary. 
(2)  Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized personnel. 
(3)  Other than limited amounts of marijuana used for display purposes, samples,  or immediate 
sale,  storing all finished marijuana and marijuana products in a secured and locked room,  safe, 
or vault,  and in a manner reasonably designed to prevent diversion,  theft,  and loss. 

26070.5 
(a)  The bureau shall,  by January 1,  2018,  investigate the feasibility of creating one or more 
classifications of nonprofit licenses under this section.  The feasibility determination shall be 
made in consultation with the relevant licensing agencies and representatives of local 
jurisdictions which issue temporary licenses pursuant to subdivision (b). 
The bureau shall consider factors including,  but not limited to,  the following: 
(1)  Should nonprofit licensees be exempted from any or all state taxes,  licensing fees and 
regulatory provisions applicable to  other licenses in this division? 
(2)  Should funding incentives be created to encourage others licensed under this division to 
provide professional services at reduced or no cost to  nonprofit licensees? 
(3)  Should nonprofit licenses be limited to,  or prioritize those,  entities previously operating on a 
not-for-profit basis primarily providing whole-plant marijuana and marijuana products and a 
diversity of marijuana strains and seed stock to  low income persons? 
(b) Any local jurisdiction may issue temporary local licenses to nonprofit entities primarily 
providing whole-plant marijuana and marijuana products and a diversity of marijuana strains 
and seed stock to low income persons so long as the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  confirms the license applicant's status as a nonprofit entity registered with the California 
Attorney General's Registry of Charitable Trusts and that the applicant is  in good standing with 
all state requirements governing nonprofit entities; 
(2)  licenses and regulates any such entity to  protect public health and safety,  and so as to 
require compliance with all environmental requirements in this division; 
(3) provides notice to  the bureau of any such local licenses issued,  including the name and 
location of any such licensed entity and all local regulations governing the licensed entity's 
operation,  and; 
(4)  certifies to the bureau that any such licensed entity will not generate annual gross revenues 
in excess of two million dollars ($2, 000, 000). 
(c)  Temporary local licenses authorized under subdivision (b)  shall expire after twelve months 
unless renewed by the local jurisdiction. 
( d)  The bureau may impose reasonable additional requirements on the local licenses authorized 
under subdivision (b). 

28 

(e)  (1) No new temporary local licenses shall be issued pursuant to  this section after the date the 
bureau determines that creation of nonprofit licenses under this division is not feasible,  or if the 
bureau determines such licenses are feasible,  after the date a licensing agency commences 
issuing state nonprofit licenses. 
(2)  If the bureau determines such licenses are feasible,  no temporary license issued under 
subdivision (b)  shall be renewed or extended after the date on which a licensing agency 
commences issuing state nonprofit licenses. 
(3) If the bureau determines that creation of nonprofit licenses under this division is not feasible, 
the bureau shall provide notice of this determination to  all local jurisdictions that have issued 
temporary licenses under subdivision (b).  The bureau may,  in its discretion, permit any such 
local jurisdiction to renew or extend on an annual basis any temporary license previously issued 
under subdivision (b). 

Chapter 8.  Distribution and Transport 

26080. 
(a)  This division shall not be construed to  authorize or permit a licensee to  transport or 
distribute,  or cause to be transported or distributed,  marijuana or marijuana products outside 
the state,  unless authorized by federal law. 
(b) A localjurisdiction shall not prevent transportation of marijuana or marijuana products on 
public roads by a licensee transporting marijuana or marijuana products in compliance with this 
division. 

Chapter 9.  Delivery 

26090. 
(a) Deliveries, as defined in this division,  may only be made by a licensed retailer or 
microbusiness,  or a licensed nonprofit under Section 26070.5. 
(b) A  customer requesting delivery shall maintain a physical or electronic copy of the delivery 
request and shall make it available upon request by the licensing authority and law enforcement 
officers. 
(c) A  local jurisdiction shall not prevent delivery of marijuana or marijuana products on public 
roads by a licensee acting in compliance with this division and local law as adopted under 
Section 26200. 

Chapter 10.  Manufacturers and Testing Laboratories 

26100. 
The Department of Public Health shall promulgate regulations governing the licensing of 
marijuana manufacturers and testing laboratories. Licenses to  be issued are as follows: 
(a)  "Manufacturing Level 1, "for sites that manufacture marijuana products using nonvolatile 
solvents,  or no solvents. 
(b)  "Manufacturing Level 2, "for sites that manufacture marijuana products using volatile 
solvents. 
(c)  "Testing, "for testing of marijuana and marijuana products.  Testing licensees shall have 
their facilities or devices licensed according to regulations set forth by the Department. A  testing 

29 

licensee shall not hold a license in another license category of this division and shall not own or 
have ownership interest in a non-testing facility licensed pursuant to  this division. 
(d)  For purposes of this section,  "volatile solvents" shall have the same meaning as in 
subdivision ( d)  of Section 113 62.2 of the Health and Safety Code unless otherwise provided by 
law or regulation. 

26101. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law,  no marijuana or marijuana products may be sold 
pursuant to  a license provided for under this division unless a representative sample of such 
marijuana or marijuana product has been tested by a certified testing service to  determine: 
(1)  Whether the chemical profile of the sample conforms to the labeled content of compounds, 
including,  but not limited to,  all of the following: 
(A)  Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). 
(B)  Tetrahydrocannabinolic Acid (THCA). 
(CJ  Cannabidiol (CED). 
(DJ  Cannabidiolic Acid (CBDA). 
(E)  The  terpenes described in the most current version of the cannabis inflorescence monograph 
published by the American Herbal Pharmacopoeia. 
(F)  Cannabigerol (CBG). 
(G)  Cannabinol (CBN). 
(2)  That the presence of contaminants does not exceed the levels in the most current version of 
the American Herbal Pharmacopoeia monograph. For purposes of this paragraph,  contaminants 
includes,  but is not limited to,  all of the following: 
(A)  Residual solvent or processing chemicals,  including explosive gases,  such as Butane, 
propane,  02 or H2,  and poisons,  toxins,  or carcinogens,  such as Methanol,  Iso-propyl Alcohol, 
Methylene Chloride, Acetone, Benzene,  Toluene,  and Tri-chloro-ethylene. 
(BJ  Foreign material,  including,  but not limited to,  hair,  insects,  or similar or related adulterant. 
(CJ  Microbiological impurity,  including total aerobic microbial count,  total yeast mold count,  P. 
aeruginosa,  aspergillus spp.,  s.  aureus,  aflatoxin Bl, B2,  GI,  or G2,  or ochratoxin A. 
(b)  Residual levels of volatile organic compounds shall satisfy standards of the cannabis 
inflorescence monograph set by the  United States Pharmacopeia (USP.  Chapter 467). 
(c)  The testing required by paragraph (a)  shall be performed in a manner consistent with 
general requirements for the competence of testing and calibrations activities,  including 
sampling,  using standard methods established by the International Organization for 
Standardization,  specifically ISOIIEC 17020 and ISOIIEC 17025 to  test marijuana and 
marijuana products that are approved by an accrediting body that is a signatory to  the 
International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation Mutual Recognition Agreement. 
(d) Any pre-sale inspection,  testing transfer,  or transportation of marijuana products pursuant to 
this section shall coriform to  a specified chain of custody protocol and any other requirements 
imposed under this division. 

26102. 
A licensed testing service shall not handle,  test,  or analyze marijuana or marijuana products 
unless the licensed testing laboratory meets the requirements of Section 19343 in Chapter 3.5 of 
Division 8 or unless otherwise provided by law. 

30 

26103. 
A  licensed testing service shall issue a certificate of analysis for each lot,  with supporting data, 
to  report the same information required in Section 19344 in Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or unless 
otherwise provided by law. 

26104. 
(a) A licensed testing service shall,  in performing activities concerning marijuana and marijuana 
products, comply with the requirements and restrictions set forth  in applicable law and 
regulations. 
(b)  The Department of Public Health shall develop procedures to: 
(]) ensure that testing of marijuana and marijuana products occurs prior to  distribution to 
retailers,  microbusinesses,  or nonprofits licensed under Section 26070.5; 
(2)  specify how often licensees shall test marijuana and marijuana products,  and that the cost of 
testing marijuana shall be borne by the licensed cultivators and the cost of testing marijuana 
products shall be borne by the licensed manufacturer,  and that the costs of testing marijuana and 
marijuana products shall be borne a nonprofit licensed under Section 26070.5; and 
(3)  require destruction of harvested batches whose testing samples indicate noncompliance with 
health and safety standards promulgated by the Department of Public Health,  unless remedial 
measures can bring the marijuana or marijuana products into compliance with quality 
assurance standards as promulgated by the Department of Public Health. 

26105. 
Manufacturing Level 2 licensees shall enact sufficient methods or procedures to capture or 
otherwise limit risk of explosion,  combustion,  or any other unreasonably dangerous risk to 
public safety created by volatile solvents.  The Department of Public Health shall establish 
minimum standards concerning such methods and procedures for Level 2 licensees. 

26106. 
Standards for the production and labeling of all marijuana products developed by the 
Department of Public Health shall apply to  licensed manufacturers and microbusinesses,  and 
nonprofits licensed under Section 26070.5 unless otherwise specified by the Department of 
Public Health. 

Chapter 11.  Quality Assurance, Inspection, and Testing 

26110. 
(a)  All marijuana and marijuana products shall be subject to  quality assurance,  inspection,  and 
testing. 
(b)  All marijuana and marijuana products shall undergo quality assurance,  inspection,  and 
testing in the same manner as provided in Section 19326 in Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 except as 
otherwise provided in this division or by law. 

31 

Chapter 12.  Packaging and Labeling 

26120. 
(a)  Prior to  delivery or sale at a retailer,  marijuana and marijuana products shall be labeled 
and placed in a resealable,  child resistant package. 
(b)  Packages and labels shall not be made to  be attractive to  children. 
(c) All marijuana and niarijuana product labels and inserts shall include the following 
information prominently displayed in a clear and legible fashion in accordance with the 
requirements,  including font size, prescribed by the bureau or the Department of Public Health: 
not kss than 8point font: 
(I) Manufacture date and source. 
(2)  The following statements,  in bold print: 
(A)  For marijuana:  "GOVERNMENT WARNING:  THIS PACKAGE CONTAINS MARIJUANA, 
A SCHEDULE I  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN AND 
ANIMALS. MARIJUANA MAY ONLY BE POSSESSED OR CONSUMED BY PERSONS 21 
YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER UNLESS THE PERSON IS A QUALIFIED PATIENT 
MARIJUANA  USE WHILE PREGNANT OR BREASTFEEDING MAY BE HARMFUL. 
CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA IMP AIRS YOUR ABILITY TO DRIVE AND OPERATE 
MACHINERY PLEASE USE EXTREME CAUTION" 
(B)  For marijuana products:  "GOVERNMENT WARNING:  THIS PRODUCT CONTAINS 
MARIJUANA, A SCHEDULE I CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  KEEP OUT OF REACH OF 
CHILDREN AND ANIMALS. MARIJUANA PRODUCTS MAY ONLY BE POSSESSED OR 
CONSUMED BY PERSONS 21  YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER UNLESS THE PERSON IS A 
QUALIFIED PATIENT  THE INTOXICATING EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA PRODUCTS MAY 
BE DELAYED UP TO TWO HOURS.  MARIJUANA  USE  WHILE PREGNANT OR 
BREASTFEEDING MAY BE HARMFUL.  CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA PRODUCTS 
IMPAIRS YOUR ABILITY TO DRIVE AND OPERATE MACHINERY  PLEASE USE EXTREME 
CAUTION" 
(3)  For packages containing only dried flower,  the net weight of marijuana in the package. 
(4)  Identification of the source and date of cultivation,  the type of marijuana or marijuana 
product and the date of manefacturing and packaging. 
(5)  The appellation of origin,  if any. 
(6)  List of pharmacologically active ingredients,  including,  but not limited to, 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),  cannabidiol (CED),  and other cannabinoid content,  the THC and 
other cannabinoid amount in milligrams per serving,  servings per package,  and the THC and 
other cannabinoid amount in milligrams for the package total,  and the potency of the marijuana 
or marijuana product by reference to the amount of tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol in 
each serving. 
(7)  For marijuana products,  a list of all ingredients and disclosure of nutritional information in 
the same manner as the federal nutritional labeling requirements in 21  C.F.R.  section 101.9. 
(8) A  list of any solvents,  nonorganic pesticides,  herbicides,  and fertilizers that were used in the 
cultivation, production, and manufacture of such marijuana or marijuana product. 
(9) A warning if nuts or other known allergens are used. 
(I 0) Information associated with the unique identifier issued by the Department of Food and 
Agriculture. 
(11) Any other requirement set by the bureau or the Department of Public Health. 

32 

( d)  Only generic food names may be used to  describe the ingredients in edible marijuana 
products. 
(e)  In the event the bureau determines that marijuana is no longer a schedule I controlled 
substance under federal law,  the label prescribed in subdivision (c)  shall no longer require a 
statement that marijuana is a schedule I controlled substance. 

Chapter 13.  Marijuana Products 

26130. 
(a)  Marijuana products shall be: 
(1)  Not designed to  be appealing to  children or easily confused with commercially sold candy or 
foods that do  not contain marijuana. 
(2)  Produced and sold with a standardized dosage of cannabinoids not to  exceed ten  (10) 
milligrams tetrahydrocannabinol per serving. 
(3) Delineated or scored into standardized serving sizes if the marijuana product contains more 
than one serving and is an edible marijuana product in solid form. 
(4) Homogenized to  ensure uniform disbursement of cannabinoids throughout the product. 
(5) Manufactured and sold under sanitation standards established by the Department of Public 
Health,  in consultation with the bureau, for preparation, storage,  handling and sale of food 
products. 
(6)  Provided to  customers with sufficient information to  enable the informed consumption of 
such product,  including the potential effects of the marijuana product and directions as to how to 
consume the marijuana product,  as necessary. 
(b)  Marijuana,  including concentrated cannabis,  included in a marijuana product manufactured 
in compliance with law is not considered an adulterant under state law. 

Chapter 14.  Protection of Minors 

26140. 
(a) No licensee shall: 
(1)  Sell niarijuana or marijuana products to persons under 21 years of age.  · 
(2) Allow any person under 21 years of age on its premises. 
(3)  Employ or retain persons under 21 years of age. 
(4)  Sell or transfer marijuana or marijuana products unless the person to whom the marijuana 
or marijuana product is to  be sold first presents documentation which reasonably appears to  be 
a valid government-issued identification card showing that the person is 21 years of age or 
older. 
(b)  Persons under 21 years of age may be used by peace officers in the enforcement of this 
division and to apprehend licensees,  or employees or agents of licensees,  or other persons who 
sell or furnish marijuana to minors. Notwithstanding any provision of law,  any person under 21 
years of age who purchases or attempts to purchase any marijuana while under the direction of 
a peace officer is immune from prosecution for that purchase or attempt to purchase marijuana. 
Guidelines with respect to  the use of persons under 21 years of age as decoys shall be adopted 
and published by the bureau in accordance with the rulemaking portion of the Administrative 
Procedure Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 
of the Government Code). 

33 

(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  a licensee that is also a dispensary licensed under Chapter 
3.5 of Division 8 may: 
(1) Allow on the premises any person 18 years of age or older who possesses a valid 
identification card under Section 113 62. 71  of the Health and Safety Code and a valid 
government-issued identification card; 
(2)  Sell marijuana,  marijuana products,  and marijuana accessories to a person 18 years of age 
or older who possesses a valid identification card under Section 113 62. 71  of the Health and 
Safety Code and a valid government-issued identification card. 

Chapter 15.  Advertising and Marketing Restrictions 

26150. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
(a)  "Advertise" means the publication or dissemination of an advertisement. 
(b)  "Advertisement" includes any written or verbal statement,  illustration,  or depiction which is 
calculated to induce sales of marijuana or marijuana products,  including any written, printed, 
graphic,  or other material,  billboard, sign,  or other outdoor display, public transit card,  other 
periodical literature, publication,  or in a radio or television broadcast,  or in any other media; 
except that such term shall not include: 
(1) Any label affixed to  any marijuana or marijuana products,  or any individual covering, 
carton,  or other wrapper of such container that constitutes a part of the labeling under 
provisions of this division. 
(2)  Any editorial or other reading material (e.g.,  news release) in any periodical or publication 
or newspaper for the publication of which no money or valuable consideration is paid or 
promised,  directly or indirectly,  by any licensee,  and which is not written by or at the direction of 
the licensee. 
(c)  "Advertising sign" is any sign, poster,  display,  billboard,  or any other stationary or 
permanently-affixed advertisement promoting the sale of marijuana or marijuana products 
which are not cultivated,  manufactured,  distributed,  or sold on the same lot. 
(d)  "Health-related statement" means any statement related to  health,  and includes statements 
of a curative or therapeutic nature that,  expressly or by implication,  suggest a relationship 
between the consumption of marijuana or marijuana products and health benefits,  or effects on 
health. 
(e)  "Market" or  "Marketing" means any act or process of promoting or selling marijuana or 
marijuana products,  including but not limited to,  sponsorship of sporting events, point of sale 
advertising,  development of products specifically designed to  appeal to  certain demographics, 
etc. 

26151. 
(a) All advertisements and marketing shall accurately and legibly identify the licensee 
responsible for its content. 
(b) Any advertising or marketing placed in broadcast,  cable,  radio, print and digital 
communications shall only be displayed where at least 71. 6 percent of the audience is 
reasonably expected to  be 21 years of age or older,  as determined by reliable,  up-to-date 
audience composition data. 

34 

(c) Any advertising or marketing involving direct,  individualized communication or dialogue 
controlled by the licensee shall utilize a method of age affirmation to  verify that the recipient is 
21 years of age or older prior to  engaging in such communication or dialogue controlled by the 
licensee.  For purposes of this section,  such method of age affirmation may include user 
confirmation,  birth date disclosure,  or other similar registration method. 
( d) All advertising shall be truthful and appropriately substantiated. 

26152. 
No licensee shall: 
(a) Advertise or market in a manner that is false or untrue in any material particular,  or that, 
irrespective of falsit;y,  directly,  or by ambiguit;y,  omission,  or inference,  or by the addition of 
irrelevant,  scientific or technical matter tends to  create a misleading impression; 
(b)  Publish or disseminate advertising or marketing containing any statement concerning a 
brand or product that is inconsistent with any statement on the labeling thereof; 
(c)  Publish or disseminate advertising or marketing containing any statement,  design,  device,  or 
representation which tends to create the impression that the marijuana originated in a particular 
place or region,  unless the label of the advertised product bears an appellation of origin,  and 
such appellation of origin appears in the advertisement; 
( d) Advertise or market on a billboard or similar advertising device located on an Interstate 
Highway or State Highway which crosses the border of any other state; 
(e) Advertise or market marijuana or marijuana products in a manner intended to  encourage 
persons under the age of 21 years to  consume marijuana or marijuana products; 
(/)  Publish or disseminate advertising or marketing containing symbols,  language,  music, 
gestures,  cartoon characters or other content elements known to  appeal primarily to persons 
below the legal age of consumption; or 
(g) Advertise or market marijuana or marijuana products on an advertising sign within 1,000 
feet of a day care center,  school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 
12, playground,  or youth center. 

26153. 
No licensee shall give away any amount of marijuana or marijuana products,  or any marijuana 
accessories,  as part of a business promotion or other commercial activit;y. 

26154. 
No  licensee shall publish or disseminate advertising or marketing containing any health-related 
statement that is untrue in any particular manner or tends to  create a misleading impression as 
to  the effects on health of marijuana consumption. 

26155. 
(a)  The provisions of subsection (g)  of section 26152 shall not apply to  the placement of 
advertising signs inside a licensed premises and which are not visible by normal unaided vision 
from a public place, provided that such advertising signs do  not advertise marijuana or 
marijuana products in  a manner intended to  encourage persons under the age of 21years to 
consume marijuana or marijuana products. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to  any noncommercial speech. 

35 

Chapter 16.  Records 

26160. 
(a) A  licensee shall keep accurate records of commercial marijuana activity. 
(b) All records related to  commercial marijuana activity as defined by the licensing authorities 
shall be maintained for a minimum of seven years. 
(c)  The bureau may examine the books and records of a licensee and inspect the premises of a 
licensee as the licensing authority,  or a state or local agency,  deems necessary to perform its 
duties under this division. All inspections shall be conducted during standard business hours of 
the licensed facility or at any other reasonable time. 
(d)  Licensees shall keep records identified by the licensing authorities on the premises of the 
location licensed.  The  licensing authorities may make any examination of the records of any 
licensee.  Licensees shall also provide and deliver copies of documents to  the licensing agency 
upon request. 
(e) A licensee,  or its agent or employee,  that refuses,  impedes,  obstructs,  or interferes with an 
inspection of the premises or records of the licensee pursuant to  this section,  has engaged in a 
violation of this division. 
(/) If a licensee,  or an agent or employee of a licensee, fails to maintain or provide the records 
required pursuant to  this section,  the licensee shall be subject to a citation and fine of up to 
thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) per individual violation. 

26161. 
(a)  Every sale or transport of marijuana or marijuana products from one licensee to another 
licensee must be recorded on a sales invoice or receipt.  Sales invoices and receipts may be 
maintained electronically and must be filed in such manne,r as to  be readily accessible for 
examination by employees of the bureau or Board of Equalization and shall not be commingled 
with invoices covering other commodities. 
(b)  Each sales invoice required by subdivision (a)  shall include the name and address of the 
seller and shall include the following information: 
(1) Name and address of the purchaser. 
(2) Date of sale and invoice number. 
(3)  Kind,  quantity,  size,  and capacity of packages of marijuana or marijuana products sold. 
(4)  The cost to  the purchaser,  together with any discount applied to the price as shown on the 
invoice. 
(5)  The place from which transport of the marijuana or marijuana product was made unless 
transport was made from the premises of the licensee. 
(6) Any other information specified by the bureau or the licensing authority. 

Chapter 17.  Track and Trace System 

26170. 
(a)  The Department of Food and Agriculture,  in consultation with the bureau and the State 
Board of Equalization, shall expand the track and trace program provided for under Article 7.5 
to  include the reporting of the movement of marijuana and marijuana products throughout the 
distribution chain and provide,  at a minimum,  the same level of information for marijuana and 
marijuana products as required to  be reported for medical cannabis and medical cannabis 

36 

products, and in addition,  the amount of the cultivation tax due pursuant to Part 14.5 of the 
Revenue and Taxation Code.  The expanded track and trace program shall include an electronic 
seed to sale software tracldng system with data points for the different stages of commercial 
activity including,  but not limited to,  cultivation,  harvest, processing,  distribution,  inventory,  and 
sale. 
(b)  The Department,  in consultation with the bureau, shall ensure that licensees under this 
division are allowed to  use third-party applications, programs and ieformation technology 
systems to  comply with the requirements of the expanded track and trace program described in 
subdivision (a)  to report the movement of marijuana and marijuana products throughout th<? 
distribution chain and communicate such information to  licensing agencies as required by law. 
(c) Any software,  database or other information technology system utilized by the Department to 
implement the expanded track and trace program shall support interoperability with third-party 
cannabis business software applications and allow all licensee-facing system activities to be 
performed through a secure application programming interface (AP!)  or comparable technology 
which is well documented,  bi-directional,  and accessible to any third-party application that has 
been validated and has appropriate credentials.  The AP! or comparable technology shall have 
version control and provide adequate notice of updates to  third-party applications.  The system 
should provide a test environment for third-party applications to access that mirrors the 
production environment. 

Chapter 18.  License Fees 

26180. 
Each licensing authority shall establish a scale of application,  licensing,  and renewal fees,  based 
upon the cost of enforcing this division,  as follows: 
(a)  Each licensing authority shall charge each licensee a licensure and renewal fee,  as 
applicable.  The licensure and renewal fee shall be calculated to cover the costs of administering 
this division.  The  licensure fee may vary depending upon the varying costs associated with 
administering the various regulatory requirenients of this division as they relate to  the nature 
and scope of the different licensure activities,  including,  but not limited to,  the track and trace 
program required pursuant to Section 26170,  but shall not exceed the reasonable regulatory 
costs to  the licensing authority. 
(b)  The total fees assessed pursuant to  this division shall be set at an amount that will fairly and 
proportionately generate sufficient total revenue to fully cover the total costs of administering 
· this division. 
(c) All license fees shall be set on a scaled basis by the licensing authority,  dependent on the size 
of the business. 
(d)  The licensing authority shall deposit all fees collected in a fee account specific to  that 
licensing authority,  to be established in the Marijuana Control Fund.  Moneys in the licensing 
authority fee accounts shall be used,  upon appropriation by the Legislature,  by the designated 
licensing authority for the administration of this division. 

26181. 
The State Water Resources Control Board,  the Department of Fish and Wildlife,  and other 
agencies may establish fees to cover the costs of their marijuana regulatory programs. 

37 

Chapter 19.  Annual Reports; Performance Audit 

26190. 
Beginning on March 1,  2020,  and on or before March 1 of each year thereafter,  each licensing 
authority shall prepare and submit to  the Legislature an annual report on the authority's 
activities concerning commercial marijuana activities and post the report on the authority's 
website.  The  report shall include,  but not be limited to,  the same type of iriformation specified in 
Section 19353,  and a detailed list of the petitions for regulatory relief or rulemaking changes 
received by the office from licensees requesting modifications of the eriforcement of rules under 
this division. 

26191. 
(aJ  Commencing January 1,  2019,  and by January 1 of each year thereafter,  the Bureau of State 
Audits shall conduct a performance audit of the bureau's activities under this division,  and shall 
report its findings to  the bureau and the Legislature by July 1 of that same year.  The report shall 
include,  but not be limited to,  the following: 
(lJ  The actual costs of the program. 
(2J  The overall effectiveness of eriforcement programs. 
(3J  Any report submitted pursuant to  this section shall be submitted in compliance with Section 
9795 of the Government Code. 
(bJ  The Legislature shall provide sufficient funds to  the Bureau of State Audits to  conduct the 
annual audit required by this section. 

Chapter 20.  Local Control 

26200. 
(aJ  Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to supersede or limit the authority of a local 
jurisdiction to adopt and enforce local ordinances to regulate businesses licensed under this 
division,  including,  but not limited to,  local zoning and land use requirements,  business license 
requirements,  and requirements related to reducing exposure to second hand smoke,  or to 
completely prohibit the establishment or operation of one or more types of businesses licensed 
under this division within the local jurisdiction. 
(bJ  Nothing in this division shall be interpreted to  require a licensing authority to  undertake 
local law eriforcement responsibilities,  enforce local zoning requirements,  or enforce local 
licensing requirements. 
(cJ  A  local jurisdiction shall notify the bureau upon revocation of any local license, permit,  or 
authorization for a licensee to  engage in commercial marijuana activity within the local 
jurisdiction.  Within  ten  (I OJ  days of notification,  the bureau shall inform the relevant licensing 
authorities.  Within  ten  (1 OJ  days of being so informed by the bureau,  the relevant licensing 
authorities shall commence proceedings under Chapter 3 of this Division to  determine whether a 
license issued to the licensee should be suspended or revoked. 
( dJ  Notwithstanding paragraph (lJ  of subdivision (aJ  of Section 113 62.3  of the Health and Safety 
Code,  a local jurisdiction may allow for the smoking,  vaporizing,  and ingesting of marijuana or 
marijuana products on the premises of a retailer or microbusiness licensed under this division if: 
(1J  Access to  the area where marijuana consumption is allowed is restricted to persons 21 years 
of age and older; 

38 

(2)  Marijuana consumption is not visible from any public place or non-age restricted area; and 
(3)  Sale or consumption of alcohol or tobacco is not allowed on the premises. 

26201. 
Any standards,  requirements,  and regulations regarding health and safety,  environmental 
protection,  testing,  security, food safety,  and worker protections established by the state shall be 
the minimum standards for all licensees under this division statewide.  A local jurisdiction may 
establish additional standards,  requirements,  and regulations. 

26202. 
(a) A  local jurisdiction may enforce this division and the regulations promulgated by the bureau 
or any licensing authority if delegated the power to do so by the bureau or a licensing authority. 
(b)  The  bureau or any licensing authority shall implement the delegation of enforcenient 
authority in subdivision (a)  through a memorandum of understanding between the bureau or 
licensing authority and the local jurisdiction to which enforcement authority is to  be delegated. 

Chapter 21.  Funding 

26210. 
(a)  The Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act Fund established in Section 19351 of 
Chapter 3. 5 of Division 8 is hereby renamed the Marijuana  Control Fund. 
(b)  Upon the effective date of this section,  whenever "Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety 
Act Fund" appears in any statute,  regulation,  or contract,  or in any other code,  it shall be 
construed to refer to  the Marijuana Control Fund. 

26211. 
(a)  Funds for the initial establishment and support of the regulatory activities under this 
division,  including the public information program described in subdivision (c),  and for the 
activities of the Board o.fEqualization under Part 14.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation 
Code until July 1,  2017,  or until the 2017 Budget Act is enacted,  whichever occurs later,  shall be 
advanced from the  General Fund and shall be repaid by the initial proceeds from fees collected 
pursuant to  this division,  any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to  this division,  or revenues 
collected from the tax imposed by Sections 34011 and 34012 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, 
by January 1,  2025. 
(I) Funds advanced pursuant to  this subdivision shall be appropriated to  the bureau,  which shall 
distribute the moneys to  the appropriate licensing authorities,  as necessary to  implement the 
provisions of this division,  and to  the Board of Equalization,  as necessary,  to  implement the 
provisions of Part 14.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(2)  Within 45 days of this section becoming operative: 
(A)  The Director of Finance shall determine an amount of the initial advance from the General 
Fund to the Marijuana Control Fund that does not exceed thirty million dollars ($30,000,000); 
and 
(B)  There shall be advanced a sum of five million dollars ($5,000,000)from the General Fund to 
the Department of Health  Care Services to provide for the public information program described 
in subdivision (c). 

39 

(b)  Notwithstanding subdivision (a),  the Legislature shall provide sufficient funds to  the 
Marijuana Control Fund to support the activities of the bureau,  state licensing authorities under 
this division,  and the Board of Equalization to support its activities under Part 14.5 of Division 2 
of the Revenue and Taxation Code.  It is anticipated that this funding will be provided annually 
beginning on July 1,  2017. 
(c)  The Department of Health Care Services shall establish and implement a public information 
program no  later than September 1,  2017.  This public information program shall,  at a 
minimum,  describe the provisions of the Control,  Regulate,  and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act 
of 2016,  the scientific basis for restricting access of marijuana and marijuana products to 
persons under the age of 21 years,  describe the penalties for providing access to marijuana and 
marijuana products to persons under the age of 21 years, provide information regarding the 
dangers of driving a motor vehicle,  boat,  vessel,  aircraft,  or other vehicle used for transportation 
while impaired from marijuana use,  the potential harms of using marijuana while pregnant or 
breastfeeding, and the potential harms of overusing marijuana or marijuana products. 

Section 147.6 of the Labor Code is hereby added as follows: 

147.6. 
(a)  By March 1,  2018,  the Division of Occupational Safety and Health shall convene an advisory 
committee to  evaluate whether there is a need to develop industry-specific regulations related to 
the activities of licensees under Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code,  including but 
not limited to,  whether specific requirements are needed to address exposure to second-hand 
marijuana smoke by employees at facilities where on-site consumption of marijuana is permitted 
under subdivision (d)  of Section 26200 of the Business and Professions Code,  and whether 
specific requirements are needed to address the potential risks of combustion,  inhalation, armed 
robberies or repetitive strain injuries. 
(b)  By October 1,  2018,  the advisory committee shall present to  the board its findings and 
recommendations for consideration by the board. By October 1,  2018,  the board shall render a 
decision regarding the adoption of industry-specific regulations pursuant to  this section. 

Section 13276 of the Water Code is amended to read: 

13276. 
(a) The multiagency task force, the Department of Fish and Wildlife and State Water Resources 
Control Board pilot project to address the Environmental Impacts of Cannabis Cultivation, 
assigned to respond to the damages caused by marijuana cultivation on public and private lands 
in California, shall continue its enforcement efforts on a permanent basis and expand them to  a 
statewide level to  ensure the reduction of adverse impacts of marijuana cultivation on water 
quality and on fish and wildlife throughout the state. 
(b) Each regional board shall, and the State Water Resources Control Board may,  address 
discharges of waste resulting from medical marijuana cultivation and commercial marijuana 
cultivation under Division 10 of the Business and Profession Code and associated activities, 
including by adopting a general pennit, establishing waste discharge requirements, or taking 
action pursuant to  Section 13269. In addressing these discharges, each regional board shall 
include conditions to address items that include, but are not limited to, all of the following: 
(1) Site development and maintenance, erosion control, and drainage features. 

40 

(2) Stream crossing installation and maintenance. 
(3) Riparian and wetland protection and management. 
( 4) Soil disposal. 
(5) Water storage and use. 
( 6) Irrigation runoff. 
(7) Fertilizers and soil. 
(8) Pesticides and herbicides. 
(9) Petroleum products and other chemicals. 
(10) Cultivation-related waste. 
(11) Refuse and human waste. 
(12) Cleanup, restoration, and mitigation. 

SECTION 7. MARIJUANA TAX. 

Part 14.5 (commencing with Section 34010) is added to Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation 
Code,  to  read: 

Part 14.5. Marijuana Tax 

34010. 
For purposes of this part: 
(a)  "Board" shall mean the Board of Equalization or its successor agency. 
(b)  "Bureau" shall mean the Bureau of Marijuana  Control within the Department of Consumer 
Affairs. 
(c)  "Tax Fund" means the California Marijuana Tax Fund created by Section 34018. 
(d)  "Marijuana" shall have the same meaning as set forth  in Section 11018 of the Health and 
Safety Code and shall also mean medical cannabis. 
(e)  "Marijuana products" shall have the same meaning as set forth  in Section 11018.1 of the 
Health and Safety Code and shall also mean medical concentrates and medical cannabis 
products. 
(/)  "Marijuana flowers" shall mean the dried flowers of the marijuana plant as defined by the 
Board. 
(g)  "Marijuana leaves" shall mean all parts of the marijuana plant other than marijuana flowers 
that are sold or consumed. 
(h)  "Gross receipts" shall have the same meaning as set forth  in Section 6012. 
(i)  "Retail sale" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 6007. 
0)  "Person" shall have the same meaning as set for in section 6005. 
(k)  "Microbusiness" shall have the same meaning as set for in Section 26070(a)(3) of the 
Business and Professions Code. 
(l)  "Nonprofit" shall have the same meaning as set for in Section 26070.5 of the Business and 
Professions Code. 

34011. 
(a)  Effective January 1,  2018,  a marijuana excise tax shall be imposed upon purchasers of 
marijuana or marijuana products sold in this state at the rate of fifteen percent (15%)  of the 
gross receipts of any retail sale by a dispensary or other person required to  be licensed pursuant 
to  Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code or a retailer,  microbusiness, 

41 

nonprofit, or other person required to be licensed pursuant to Division 10 of the Business and 
Professions Code to sell marijuana and marijuanaproducts directly to a purchaser. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by regulation,  the tax levied under this section shall apply to 
the full price, if non-itemized,  of any transaction involving both marijuana or marijuana 
products and any other otherwise distinct and identifiable goods or services,  and the price of any 
goods or services,  if a reduction in the price of marijuana or marijuana products is contingent 
on purchase of those goods or services. 
(c) A  dispensary or other person required to be licensed pursuant to  Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of 
the Business and Professions Code or a retailer,  microbusiness,  nonprofit,  or other person 
required to  be licensed pursuant to Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code shall be 
responsible for collecting this tax and remitting it to  the board in accordance with rules and 
procedures established under law and any regulations adopted by the board. 
(d)  The excise tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to  the sales and use tax imposed by 
the state and local governments. 
(e)  Gross receipts from the sale of marijuana or marijuana products for purposes of assessing 
the sales and use tax under Part 1 of this division shall include the tax levied pursuant to this 
section. 
(!) No marijuana or marijuana products may be sold to a purchaser unless the excise tax 
required by law has been paid by the purchaser at the time of sale. 
(g)  The sales and use tax imposed by Part 1 of this division shall not apply to retail sales of 
medical cannabis,  medical cannabis concentrate,  edible medical cannabis products or topical 
cannabis as those terms are defined in  Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions 
Code when a qualified patient (or primary caregiver for a qualified patient) provides his or her 
card issued under Section 11362. 71  of the Health and Safety Code and a valid government(cid:173)
issued identification card. 

34012. 
(a)  Effective January 1,  2018,  there is hereby imposed a cultivation tax on all harvested 
marijuana that enters the commercial market upon all persons required to  be licensed to 
cultivate marijuana pursuant to  Chapter 3. 5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code 
or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code.  The tax shall be due after the marijuana is 
harvested. 
(1)  The tax for marijuana flowers shall be nine dollars and twenty five cents ($9.25) per dry(cid:173)
weight ounce. 
(2)  The tax for marijuana leaves shall be set at two dollars and seventy jive cents ($2. 75) per 
dry-weight ounce. 
(b)  The  board may adjust the tax rate for marijuana leaves annually to reflect fluctuations in the 
relative price of marijuana flowers to  marijuana leaves. 
(c)  The board may from time to time establish other categories of harvested marijuana, 
categories for unprocessed or frozen marijuana or immature plants,  or marijuana that is shipped 
directly to manefacturers.  These categories shall be taxed at their relative value compared with 
marijuana flowers. 
( d)  The  board may prescribe by regulation a method and manner for payment of the cultivation 
tax that utilizes tax stamps or state-issued product bags that indicate that all required tax has 
been paid on the product to which the tax stamp is affixed or in which the marijuana is 
packaged. 

42 

(e)  The tax stamps and product bags shall be of the designs,  specifications and denominations as 
may be prescribed by the board and may be purchased by any licensee under Chapter 3.5 of 
Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code or under Division 10 of the Business and 
Professions Code. 
(!)  Subsequent to the establishment of a tax stamp program,  the board may by regulation provide 
that no niarijuana may be removed from a licensed cultivation facility or transported on a public 
highway unless in a state-issued product bag bearing a tax stamp in  the proper denomination. 
(g)  The tax stamps and product bags shall be capable of being read by a scanning or similar 
device and must be traceable utilizing the track and trace system pursuant to Section 26170 of 
the Business and Professions Code. 
(h)  Persons required to be licensed to cultivate marijuana pursuant to  Chapter 3. 5 of Division 8 
of the Business and Professions Code or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code shall 
be responsible for payment of the tax pursuant to regulations adopted by the board.  No 
marijuana may be sold unless the tax has been paid as provided in this part. 
(i)  All marijuana removed from a cultivator's premises,  except for plant waste,  shall be 
presumed to be sold and thereby taxable under this section. 
(j)  The tax imposed by this section shall be imposed on all marijuana cultivated in the state 
pursuant to  rules and regulations promulgated by the board,  but shall not apply to  marijuana 
cultiva.ted for personal use under Section 113 62.1  of the Health and Safety Code or cultivated by 
a qualified patient or primary caregiver in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act. 
(k)  Beginning January 1,  2020,  the rates set forth in subdivisions (a),  (b),  and (c)  shall be 
adjusted by the board annually thereafter for inflation. 

34013. 
(a)  The board shall administer and collect the taxes imposed by this part pursuant to the Fee 
Collection Procedures Law (Part 30 (commencing with Section 55001) of Division 2 of the 
Revenue and Taxation Code).  For purposes of this part,  the references in the Fee Collection 
Procedures Law to  "fee" shall include the tax imposed by this part,  and references to 
''feepayer" shall include a person required to pay or collect the tax imposed by this part. 
(b)  The board may prescribe, adopt,  and enforce regulations relating to  the administration and 
enforcement of this part,  including,  but not limited to,  collections,  reporting,  refunds,  and 
appeals. 
· (c)  The board shall adopt necessary rules and regulations to  administer the  taxes in this part. 
Such rules and regulations may include methods or procedures to tag marijuana or marijuana 
products,  or the packages thereof, to  designate prior tax payment. 
( d)  The board may prescribe,  adopt,  and enforce any emergency regulations as necessary to 
implement,  administer and enforce its duties under this division.  Any emergency regulation 
prescribed, adopted,  or enforced pursuant to  this section shall be adopted in accordance with 
Chapter 3.5 (commencing with section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the 
Government Code,  and, for purposes of that chapter,  including Section 11349. 6 of the 
Government Code,  the adoption of the regulation is an emergency and shall be considered by the 
Office of Administrative Law as necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, 
health and safety,  and general welfare.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law,  the 
emergency regulations adopted by the board may remain in effect for two years jj,om adoption. 
(e) Any person who fails to pay the taxes imposed under this part shall,  in addition to owing the 
taxes not paid,  be subject to  a penalty of at least one-half the amount of the taxes not paid,  and 

. 

43 

shall be subject to  having its license revoked pursuant to Section 26031 of the Business and 
Professions Code or pursuant to  Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(/)  The board may bring such legal actions as are necessary to collect any deficiency in  the tax 
required to  be paid,  and,  upon the board's request,  the Attorney General shall bring the actions. 

34014. 
(a) All persons required to  be licensed involved in the cultivation and retail sale of marijuana or 
marijuana products must obtain a separate permit from the board pursuant to regulations 
adopted by the board.  No fee shall be charged to any person for issuance of the permit. Any 
person required to  obtain a permit who engages in business as a cultivator,  dispensary,  retailer, 
microbusiness or nonprofit pursuant to  Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and 
Professions Code or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code without a permit or after 
a permit has been canceled,  suspended,  or revoked,  and each officer of any corporation which so 
engages in business,  is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The board may require every licensed dispensary,  cultivator,  micro business,  nonprofit,  or 
other person required to be licensed,  to provide security to  cover the liability for taxes imposed 
by state law on marijuana produced or received by the cultivator,  microbusiness,  nonprofit,  or 
other person required to  be licensed in accordance with procedures to  be established by the 
board. Notwithstanding anything herein to  the contrary,  the board may waive any security 
requirement it imposes for good cause,  as determined by the board.  "Good cause" includes,  but 
is not limited to,  the inability of a cultivator,  microbusiness,  nonprofit,  or other person required 
to  be licensed to  obtain security due to  a lack of service providers or the policies of service 
providers that prohibit service to  a marijuana business. A person may not commence or continue 
any business or operation relating to marijuana cultivation until any surety required by the 
board with respect to  the business or operation have been properly prepared,  executed and 
submitted under this part. 
(c) In fixing the amount of any security required by the board,  the board shall give consideration 
to  the financial hardship that may be imposed on licensees as a result of any shortage of 
available surety providers. 

34015. 
(a)The marijuana excise tax and cultivation tax imposed by this part is due and payable to  the 
board quarterly on or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period of three 
months.  On  or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period,  a return for the 
preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the board by each person required to  be licensed 
for cultivation or retail sale under Divisions 8 or 10 of the Business and Professions Code using 
electronic media. Returns shall be authenticated in a form or pursuant to methods as may be 
prescribed by the board.  If the cultivation tax is paid by stamp pursuant to section 34012(d) the 
board may by regulation determine when and how the tax shall be paid. 
(b)  The  board may require every person engaged in the cultivation,  distribution or retail sale of 
marijuana and marijuana products required to  be licensed pursuant to  Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 
of the Business or Professions Code or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code to file, 
on or before the 25th day of each month,  a report using electronic media respecting the person's 
inventory, purchases,  and sales during the preceding month and any other information as the 
board may require to carry out the purposes of this part.  Reports shall be authenticated in a 
form or pursuant to  methods as may be prescribed by the board. 

44 

34016. 
(a) Any peace officer,  or board employee granted limited peace officer status pursuant to 
paragraph (6)  of subdivision (a)  of Section 830.11 of the Penal Code,  upon presenting 
appropriate credentials,  is authorized to  enter any place as described in paragraph (3)  and to 
conduct inspections in accordance with the following paragraphs,  inclusive. 
(1)  Inspections shall be performed in a reasonable manner and at times that are reasonable 
under the circumstances,  taking into consideration the normal business hours of the place to  be 
entered. 
(2)  Inspections may be at any place at which marijuana or marijuana products are sold to 
purchasers,  cultivated,  or stored,  or at any site where evidence of activities involving evasion of 
tax may be discovered. 
(3)  Inspections shall be requested or conducted no more than once in a 24-hour period. 
(b) Any person who fails or refuses to allow an inspection shall be subject to a misdemeanor. 
Each offense shall be punished by a fine not to  exceed five thousand dollars ($5, 000),  or 
imprisonment not exceeding one year in a county jail,  or both the fine and imprisonment.  The 
court shall order any fines assessed be deposited in the California Marijuana Tax Fund. 
(c)  Upon discovery by the board or a law enforcement agency that a licensee or any other 
person possesses, stores,  owns,  or has made a retail sale of marijuana or marijuana products, 
without evidence of tax payment or not contained in secure packaging,  the board or the law 
enforcement agency shall be authorized to seize the marijuana or marijuana products.  Any 
marijuana or marijuana products seized by a law enforcement agency or the board shall within 
seven days be deemed forfeited and the board shall comply with the procedures set forth in 
Sections 30436 through 30449,  inclusive. 
(d) Any person who renders a false or fraudulent report is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject 
to  afine not to  exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000)for each offense. 
(e) Any violation of any provisions of this part,  except as otherwise provided,  is a misdemeanor 
and is punishable as such. 
(!)  All moneys remitted to  the board under this part shall be credited to  the California Marijuana 
Tax Fund. 

34017. 
The Legislative Analyst's Office shall submit a report to  the Legislature by January 1,  2020,  with 
recommendations to  the Legislature for adjustments to  the tax rate to  achieve the goals of 
undercutting illicit market prices and discouraging use by persons younger than 21 years of age 
while ensuring sufficient revenues are generated for the programs identified in Section 34019. 

34018. 
(a)  The  California Marijuana Tax Fund is hereby created in the State Treasury.  The Tax Fund 
sh_all consist of all taxes,  interest, penalties,  and other amounts collected and paid to  the board 
pursuant to  this part,  less payment of refunds. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other law,  the California Marijuana Tax Fund is a special trust fund 
established solely to  carry out the purposes of the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of 
Marijuana Act and all revenues deposited into the  Tax Fund,  together with interest or dividends 
earned by the fund,  are hereby continuously appropriated for the purposes of the Control, 

45 

Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act without regard to fiscal year and shall be 
expended only in accordance with the provisions of this part and its purposes. 
(c) Notwithstanding any other law,  the taxes imposed by this part and the revenue derived 
therefrom,  including investment interest,  shall not be considered to  be part of the General Fund, 
as that term is used in Chapter 1 (commencing with section 163 00)  of Part 2 of Division 4 of the 
Government Code,  shall not be considered General Fund revenue for purposes of Section 8 of 
Article XVI of the California Constitution and its implementing statutes,  and shall not be 
considered "moneys" for purposes of subdivisions (a)  and (b)  of Section 8 of Article XVI of the 
California Constitution and its implementing statutes. 

34019. 
(a)  Beginning with fiscal year 2017-2018 the Department of Finance shall estimate revenues to 
be received pursuant to  sections 34011 and 34012 and provide those estimates to  the Controller 
no later than June 15 of each year.  The  Controller shall use these estimates when disbursing 
funds pursuant to  this section.  Before any funds are disbursed pursuant to subdivisions (b),  (c), 
( d),  and (e)  of this section the Controller shall disburse from the Tax Fund to  the appropriate 
account,  without regard to fiscal year,  the following: 
(1)  Reasonable costs incurred by the board for administering and collecting the taxes imposed 
by this part; provided,  however; such costs shall not exceed four percent (4%)  of tax revenues 
received. 
(2)  Reasonable costs incurred by the Bureau,  the Department of Consumer Affairs, the 
Department of Food and Agriculture, and the Department of Public Health for implementing, 
administering,  and enforcing Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code 
and Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code to  the extent those costs are not 
reimbursed pursuant to Section 26180 of the Business and Professions Code or pursuant to 
Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code.  This paragraph shall remain 
operative through fiscal year 2022-2023. 
(3)  Reasonable costs incurred by the Department of Fish and Wildlife,  the State  Water Resources 
Control Board,  and the Department of Pesticide Regulation for carrying out their respective 
duties under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code or Division 10 of 
the Business and Professions Code to  the extent those costs are not otherwise reimbursed. 
(4)  Reasonable costs incurred by the Controller for performing duties imposed by the Control, 
Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act,  including the audit required by Section 34020. 
(5) Reasonable costs incurred by the State Auditor for conducting the performance audit 
pursuant to Section 26191 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(6) Reasonable costs incurred by the Legislative Analyst's Office for performing duties imposed 
by Section 34017. 
(7)  Sufficient funds to  reimburse the Division of Labor Standards Enforcement and Occupational 
Safety and Health within the Department of Industrial Relations and the Employment 
Development Department for the costs of applying and enforcing state labor laws to  licensees 
under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code and Division 10 of the 
Business and Professions Code. 
(b)  The  Controller shall next disburse the sum of ten million dollars ($10, 000, 000) to a public 
university or universities in California annually beginning with fiscal year 2018-2019 until fiscal 
year 2028-2029 to research and evaluate the implementation and effect of the Control, Regulate 
and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act,  and shall,  if appropriate,  make recommendations to  the 

46 

Legislature and Governor regarding possible amendments to  the Control,  Regulate and Tax 
Adult Use of Marijuana Act.  The recipients of these funds shall publish reports on their findings 
at a minimum of every two years and shall make the reports available to  the public.  The Bureau 
shall select the universities to  be funded.  The research funded pursuant to  this subdivision shall 
include but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  Impacts on public health,  including health costs associated with marijuana use,  as well as 
whether marijuana use is associated with an increase or decrease in use of alcohol or other 
drugs. 
(2)  The impact of treatment for maladaptive marijuana use and the effectiveness of different 
treatment programs. 
(3)  Public safety issues related to  marijuana use,  including studying the effectiveness of the 
packaging and labeling requirements and advertising and marketing restrictions contained in 
the Act at preventing underage access to  and use of marijuana and marijuana products,  and 
studying the health-related effects among users of varying potency levels of marijuana and 
marijuana products. 
(4) Marijuana use rates,  maladaptive use rates for adults and youth,  and diagnosis rates of 
marijuana-related substance use disorders. 
(5) Marijuana market prices,  illicit market prices,  tax structures and rates,  including an 
evaluation of how to  best tax marijuana based on potency,  and the structure and function of 
licensed marijuana businesses. 
(6)  Whether additional protections are needed to prevent unlawful monopolies or anti(cid:173)
competitive behavior from occurring in the nonmedical marijuana industry and,  if so, 
recommendations as to  the most effective measures for preventing such behavior. 
(7)  The economic impacts in the private and public sectors,  including but not necessarily limited 
to, job creation,  workplace safety,  revenues,  taxes generated for state and local budgets,  and 
criminal justice impacts,  including,  but not necessarily limited to,  impacts on law enforcement 
and public resources,  short and long term consequences of involvement in the criminal justice 
system,  and state and local government agency administrative costs and revenue. 
(8)  Whether the regulatory agencies tasked with implementing and enforcing the Control, 
Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act are doing so consistent with the purposes of the 
Act,  and whether different agencies might do so more effectively.  (9)  Environmental issues 
related to marijuana production and the criminal prohibition of marijuana production. 
(10)  The geographic location,  structure,  and function of licensed marijuana businesses,  and 
demographic data,  including race,  ethnicity,  and gender,  of license holders. 
(11)  The  outcomes achieved by the changes in criminal penalties made under the Control, 
Regulate,  and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act for marijuana-related offenses,  and the outcomes 
of the juvenile justice system,  in particular, probation-based treatments and the frequency of up(cid:173)
charging illegal possession of marijuana or marijuana products to a more serious offense. 
(c)  The  Controller shall next disburse the sum of three million dollars ($3, 000, 000)  annually to 
the Department of the California Highway Patrol beginning fiscal year 2018-2019 until fiscal 
year 2022-2023 to  establish and adopt protocols to  determine whether a driver is operating a 
vehicle while impaired,  including impairment by the use of marijuana or marijuana products, 
and to  establish and adopt protocols setting forth best practices to  assist law enforcement 
agencies.  The  department may hire personnel to  establish the protocols specified in this 
subdivision.  In addition,  the department may make grants to public and private research 

47 

institutions for the purpose of developing technology for determining when a driver is operating 
a vehicle while impaired,  including impairment by the use of marijuana or marijuana products. 
( d)  The  Controller shall next disburse the sum of ten million dollars ($10, 000, 000) beginning 
fiscal year 2018-2019 and increasing ten million dollars ($10, 000, 000)  each fiscal year 
thereafter until fiscal year 2022-2023,  at which time the disbursement shall be fifty million 
dollars ($5 0, 000, 000) each year thereafter,  to  the Governor's Office of Business and Economic 
Development,  in consultation with the Labor and Workforce Development Agency and the 
Department of Social Services,  to  administer a Community Reinvestments grants program to 
local health departments and at least fifty-percent to qualified community-based nonprofit 
organizations to support job placement,  mental health treatment,  substance use disorder 
treatment, system navigation services,  legal services to address barriers to reentry,  and linkages 
to medical care for communities disproportionately affected by past federal and state drug 
policies.  The  Office shall solicit input from community-based job skills, job placement,  and legal 
service providers with relevant expertise as to  the administration of the grants program. In 
addition,  the Office shall periodically evaluate the programs it is funding to determine the 
effectiveness of the programs, shall not spend more than four percent (4%) for administrative 
costs related to  implementation,  evaluation and oversight of the programs,  and shall award 
grants annually,  beginning no later than January 1,  2020. 
(e)  The  Controller shall next disburse the sum of two million dollars ($2, 000, 000) annually to  the 
University of California San Diego Center for Medicinal Cannabis Research to further the 
objectives of the Center including the enhanced understanding of the efficacy and adverse effects 
of marijuana as a pharmacological agent. 
(!)  By July 15 of each fiscal year beginning in fiscal year 2018-2019,  the Controller shall,  after 
disbursing funds pursuant to subdivisions (a),  (b),  (c),  (d),  and (e),  disburse funds deposited in 
the Tax Fund during the prior fiscal year into sub-trust accounts,  which are hereby created,  as 
follows: 
(1)  Sixty percent (60%) shall be deposited in the Youth Education, Prevention, Early 
Intervention and Treatment Account,  and disbursed by the  Controller to  the Department of 
Health Care Services for programs for youth that are designed to  educate about and to prevent 
substance use disorders and to prevent harm from substance use.  The Department of Health 
Care services shall enter into inter-agency agreements with the Department of Public Health 
and the Department of Education to  implement and administer these programs.  The programs 
shall emphasize accurate education,  effective prevention,  early intervention,  school retention, 
and timely treatment services for youth,  their families and caregivers.  The programs may 
include,  but are not limited to,  the following components: 
(A)  Prevention and early intervention services including outreach,  risk survey and education to 
youth, families,  caregivers,  schools, primary care health providers,  behavioral health and 
substance use disorder service providers,  community and faith-based organizations, foster care 
providers, juvenile and family courts,  and others to recognize and reduce risks related to 
substance use,  and the early signs of problematic use and of substance use disorders. 
(BJ  Grants to schools to  develop and support Student Assistance Programs,  or other similar 
programs, designed to prevent and reduce substance use,  and improve school retention and 
performance,  by supporting students who are at risk of dropping out of school and promoting 
alternatives to suspension or expulsion that focus on school retention,  remediation,  and 
professional care.  Schools with higher than average dropout rates should be prioritized for 
grants. 

48 

(CJ  Grants to programs for outreach,  education and treatment for homeless youth and out-of(cid:173)
school youth with substance use disorders. 
(D) Access and linkage to  care provided by county behavioral health programs for youth,  and 
their families and caregivers,  who have a substance use disorder or who are at risk for 
developing a substance use disorder. 
(E)  Youth-focused substance use disorder treatment programs that are culturally and gender 
competent,  trauma-informed,  evidence-based and provide a continuum of care that includes 
, screening and assessment (substance use disorder as well as mental health),  early intervention, 
active treatment, family involvement,  case management,  overdose prevention, prevention of 
communicable diseases related to substance use,  relapse management for substance use and 
other co-occurring behavioral health disorders,  vocational services,  literacy services, parenting 
classes, family therapy and counseling services,  medication-assisted treatments, psychiatric 
medication and psychotherapy.  When indicated,  referrals must be made to  other providers. 
(F)  To  the extent permitted by law and where indicated,  interventions shall utilize a two(cid:173)
generation approach to  addressing substance use disorders with the capacity to  treat youth and 
adults together.  This would include supporting the development of family-based interventions 
that address substance use disorders and related problems within the context of families, 
including parents, foster parents,  caregivers and all their children. 
(G)  Programs to assist individuals,  as well as families and friends of drug using young people,  to 
reduce the stigma associated with substance use including being diagnosed with a substance use 
disorder or seeking substance use disorder services.  This includes peer-run outreach and 
education to  reduce stigma,  anti-stigma campaigns,  and community recovery networks. 
(HJ  Workforce training and wage structures that increase the hiring pool of behavioral health 
staff with substance use disorder prevention and treatment expertise.  Provide ongoing education 
and coaching that increases substance use treatment providers ' core competencies and trains 
providers on promising and evidenced-based practices. 
(I)  Construction of community-based youth treatment facilities. 
(J)  The departments may contract with each county behavioral health program for the provision 
of services. 
(K)  Fund~ shall be allocated to  counties based on demonstrated need,  including the number of 
youth in the county,  the prevalence of substance use disorders among adults,  and confirmed 
through statistical data,  validated assessments or submitted reports prepared by the applicable 
county to demonstrate and validate need. 
(L)  The departments shall periodically evaluate the programs they are funding to determine the 
effectiveness of the programs. 
(M)  The departments may use up to four percent (4%)  of the moneys allocated to  the Youth 
Education, Prevention, Early Intervention and Treatment Account for administrative costs 
related to implementation,  evaluation and oversight of the programs. 
(NJ If the Department of Finance ever determines that funding pursuant to marijuana taxation 
exceeds demand for youth prevention and treatment services in  the state,  the departments shall 
provide a plan to  the Department of Finance to provide treatment services to  adults as well as 
youth using these funds. 
(OJ  The departments shall solicit input from volunteer health organizations, physicians who treat 
addiction,  treatment researchers, family therapy and counseling providers,  and professional 
education associations with relevant expertise as to  the administration of any grants made 
pursuant to  this paragraph. 

49 

(2J  Twenty percent (20%J shall be deposited in the Environmental Restoration and Protection 
Account,  and disbursed by the  Controller as follows: 
(AJ  To  the Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Department of Parks and Recreation for the 
cleanup,  remediation,  and restoration of environmental damage in watersheds affected by 
marijuana cultivation and related activities including,  but not limited to,  damage that occurred 
prior to enactment of this part,  and to support local partnerships for this purpose.  The 
Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Department of Parks and Recreation may distribute a 
portion of the funds they receive from the Environmental Restoration and Protection Account 
through grants for purposes specified in this paragraph. 
(BJ  To  the Department of Fish and Wildlife and the Department of Parks and Recreation for the 
stewardship and operation of state-owned wildlife habitat areas and state park units in a manner 
that discourages and prevents the illegal cultivation, production, sale and use of marijuana and 
marijuana products on public lands,  and to facilitate the investigation,  enforcement and 
prosecution of illegal cultivation, production, sale,  and use of marijuana or 1narijuana products 
on public lands. 
(CJ  To  the Department of Fish and Wildlife to  assist in funding the watershed enforcement 
program and multiagency task force established pursuant to subdivisions (bJ  and (cJ  of Section 
12029 of the Fish and Game Code to facilitate the investigation,  enforcement,  and prosecution of 
these offenses and to  ensure the reduction of adverse impacts of marijuana cultivation, 
production, sale,  and use on fish  and wildlife habitats throughout the state. 
(DJ  For purposes of this paragraph,  the Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency shall 
determ,ine the allocation of revenues between the departments.  During the first five years of 
implementation, first consideration should be given to funding purposes specified in 
subparagraph (AJ. 
(EJ  Funds allocated pursuant to  this paragraph shall be used to  increase and enhance activities 
described in subparagraphs (AJ,  (BJ,  and (CJ,  and not replace allocation of other funding for 
these purposes. Accordingly, annual General Fund appropriations to  the Department of Fish 
and Wildlife and the Department of Parks and Recreation shall not be reduced below the levels 
provided in the Budget Act of 2014 (Chapter 25 of Statutes of 2014J. 
(3J  Twenty percent (20%J  shall be deposited into the State and Local Government Law 
Enforcement Account and disbursed by the Controller as follows: 
(AJ  To  the Department of the California Highway Patrol for conducting training programs for 
detecting,  testing and enforcing laws against driving under the influence of alcohol and other 
drugs,  including driving under the influence of marijuana.  The Department may hire personnel 
to  conduct the training programs specified in this subparagraph. 
(BJ  To  the Department of the California Highway Patrol to fund internal California Highway 
Patrol programs and grants to qualified nonprofit organizations and local governments for 
education, prevention and enforcement of laws related to  driving under the influence of alcohol 
and other drugs,  including marijuana; programs that help enforce traffic laws,  educate the 
public in traffic safety, provide varied and effective means of reducing fatalities,  injuries and 
economic losses from collisions; and for the purchase of equipment related to  enforcement of 
laws related to  driving under the influence of alcohol and other drugs,  including marijuana. 
(CJ  To  the Board of State and Community Corrections for making grants to  local governments to 
assist with law enforcement, fire protection,  or other local programs addressing public health 
and safety associated with the implementation of the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use of 
Marijuana Act.  The Board shall not make any grants to  local governments which have banned 

50 

the cultivation,  including personal cultivation under Section l l 362.2(b)(3J of the Health and 
Safety Code,  or retail sale of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to  Section 26200 of the 
Business and Professions Code or as otherwise provided by law. 
(DJ  For purposes of this paragraph the Department of Finance shall determine the allocation of 
revenues between the agencies; provided,  however,  beginning in fiscal year 2022-2023 the 
amount allocated pursuant to subparagraph (AJ  shall not be less than ten million dollars 
($10, 000, OOOJ  annually and the amount allocated pursuant to subparagraph (BJ  shall not be less 
than forty million dollars ($40, 000, OOOJ  annually. In determining the amount to  be allocated 
before fiscal year 2022-2023 pursuant to  this paragraph,  the Department of Finance shall give 
initial priority to subparagraph (A). 
(gJ  Funds allocated pursuant to subdivision (!)  shall be used to  increase the funding of programs 
and purposes identified and shall not be used to  replace allocation of other funding for these 
purposes. 
(hJ  Effective July 1,  2028,  the Legislature may amend this section by majority vote to further the 
purposes of the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act,  including allocating 
funds to programs other than those specified in subdivisions ( dJ  and (!)  of this section. Any 
revisions pursuant to this subdivision shall not result in a reduction of funds to  accounts 
established pursuant to subdivisions (dJ  and(!) in any subsequent year from the amount 
allocated to  each account in fiscal year 2027-2028.  Prior to July 1,  2028,  the Legislature may 
not change the allocations to programs specified in subdivisions (dJ  and(!) of this section. 

34020. 
The Controller shall periodically audit the Tax Fund to  ensure that those funds are used and 
accounted for in a manner consistent with this part and as otherwise required by law. 

34021. 
(aJ  The taxes imposed by this Part shall be in addition to  any other tax imposed by a city,  county, 
or city and county. 

34021.5 
(aJ  (lJ  A  county may impose a tax on the privilege of cultivating,  manufacturing, producing, 
processing, preparing, storing, providing,  donating,  selling,  or distributing marijuana or 
marijuana products by a licensee operating under Chapter 3. 5 of Division 8 of the Business and 
Professions Code or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(2J  The board of supervisors shall specify in the ordinance proposing the tax the activities 
subject to the tax,  the applicable rate or rates,  the method of apportionment,  if necessary, and 
the manner of collection of the tax.  The tax may be imposed for general governmental purposes 
or for purposes specified in  the ordinance by the board of supervisors. 
(3 J  In addition to  any other method of collection authorized by law,  the board of supervisors 
may provide for the collection of the tax imposed pursuant to  this section in the same manner, 
and subject to the same penalties and priority of lien,  as other charges and taxes fixed and 
collected by the county.  A  tax imposed pursuant to  this section is a tax and not a fee or special 
assessment.  The board of supervisors shall specify whether the tax applies throughout the entire 
county or within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(4J  The tax authorized by this section may be imposed upon any or all of the activities set forth 
in paragraph (lJ,  as specified in the ordinance,  regardless of whether the activity is undertaken 

51 

individually,  collectively,  or cooperatively,  and regardless of whether the activity is for 
compensation or gratuitous,  as determined by the board of supervisors. 
(b)  A  tax imposed pursuant to this section shall be subject to applicable voter approval 
requirements imposed by law. 
(c)  This section is declaratory of existing law and does not limit or prohibit the levy or 
collection of any other fee,  charge,  or tax,  or a license or service fee or charge upon,  or related 
to,  the activities set forth  in subdivision (a)  as otherwise provided by law.  This section shall not 
be construed as a limitation upon the taxing authority of a county as provided by law. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to  authorize a county to impose a sales or use tax in 
addition to  the sales and use tax imposed under an ordinance conforming to  the provisions of 
Sections  7202 and 7203  of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

SECTION 8.  CRIMINAL OFFENSES, RECORDS, AND RESENTENCING. 

Sections 11357, 11358, 11359, 11360 and 11361.5 of the Health and Safety Code are 
amended, and Sections 11361.1 and 11361.8 are added to read as follows: 

11357. Possession 
(a) Except as  authorized by lav,r,  every person vmo possesses any concentrated cannabis shall be 
punished by imprisomnent in the county jail for a period of not more than one year or by a fine 
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500), or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that 
such person may instead be punished pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170 of the Penal 
Gode if that person has one or more prior convictions for an offense specified in clause (iv) of 
subparagraph (G)  of paragraph (2) of subdivision (e) of Section 667 of the Penal Gode or for an 
offense requiring registration pursuant to  subdivision (c) of Section 290 of the Penal Gode. 
(ea) Except as authorized by law, every person 1vvho  possessesion of not more than 28.5 grams of 
marijuana, other than or not more than four grams of concentrated cannabis, is guilty of an 
infraction punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100). or both, shall be 
punished or adjudicated as follows: 
(1)  Persons under the age of 18 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be required to: 
(A)  Upon a finding that a first offense has been committed,  complete four hours of drug 
education or counseling and up to  10 hours of community service over a period not to exceed 60 
days. 
(B)  Upon a finding that a second offense or subsequent offense has been committed,  complete six 
hours of drug education or counseling and up to 20 hours of community service over a period 
not to exceed 90 days. 
(2)  Persons at least 18 years of age but less than 21 years of age shall be guilty of an infraction 
and punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100). 
(eh) Except as authorized by law, every person vmo possessesion of more than 28.5 grams of 
marijuana, or more than four grams of other than concentrated cannabis, shall be punished as 
follows: 
(1)  Persons under the age of 18 who possess more than 28.5 grams of marijuana or more than 
four grams of concentrated cannabis,  or both,  shall be guilty ofan infraction and shall be 
required to: 

52 

(A)  Upon a finding that a first offense has been committed,  complete eight hours of drug 
education or counseling and up to  40 hours of community service over a period not to  exceed 90 
days. 
(B)  Upon a finding that a second or subsequent offense has been committed,  complete 10 hours 
of drug education or counseling and up to .60 hours of community service over a period not to 
exceed 120 days. 
(2)  Persons 18 years of age or over who possess more than 28.5 grams of marijuana,  or more 
than four grams of concentrated cannabis,  or both,  shall be punished by imprisomnent in a 
county jail for a period of not more than six months or by a fine of not more than five hundred 
dollars ($500), or by both such fine and imprisomnent. 
(de) Except as authorized by law, every person 18 years of age or over who possesses not more 
than 28.5 grams of marijuana, or not more than four grams of other than concentrated cannabis, 
upon the grounds of, or within, any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any of grades 
1 through 12 during hours the school is open for classes or school-related programs is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and shall be punished by-a as follows: 
(1) A fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250),  upon a finding that a first offense 
has been committed. 
(2) A  fine of not more than five  hundred dollars ($500), or by imprisonment in a  county jail for 
a period of not more than 10 days, or both,  upon a finding that a second or subsequent offense 
has been committed. 
(ed) Except as authorized by law, every person under the age of 18 who possesses not more than 
28.5 grams of marijuana, or not more than four grams of other than concentrated cannabis, upon 
the grounds of, or within, any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any of grades 1 
through 12 during hours the school is open for classes or school-related programs is guilty of-a 
misdemeanor an infraction and shall be punished in the same manner provided in paragraph (1) 
of subdivision (b)  of this section.  subject to  the following dispositions: 
(1) ,A,.  fine of not more than t,-,;v:o  hundred fifty dollars ($250), upon a finding that a first offense 
has been c01m11itted. 
(2) ,A._  fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500), or commitment to a juvenile hall, ranch, 
camp, forestry camp, or secure juvenile home for a period of not more than 10 days, or both, 
upon a finding that a second or subsequent offense has been committed. 

11358. Planting, harvesting, or processing 
Every person who plants, cultivates, harvests, dries, or processes any marijuana plants,  or any 
part thereof, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  Every person under the age of 18 who plants,  cultivates,  harvests,  dries,  or processes any 
marijuana plants shall be punished in the same manner provided in paragraph (1)  of subdivision 
(b)  of section 11357. 
(b)  Every person at least 18 years of age but less than 21 years of age who plants,  cultivates, 
harvests,  dries,  or processes not more than six living marijuana plants shall be guilty of an 
infraction and a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100). 
(c)  Every person 18 years of age or over who plants, cultivates, harvests,  dries,  or processes 
more than six living marijuana plants shall be punished by imprisonment in a county jail for a 
period of not more than six months or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500),  or 
by both such fine and imprisonment. 

53 

( d) Not:withstanding subdivision (c),  a person 18 years of age or over who plants,  cultivates, 
harvests,  dries,  or processes more than six living marijuana plants,  or any part thereof, except as 
otherwise provided by law,  shall may be punished by imprisom11ent pursuant to subdivision (h) 
of Section 1170 of the Penal Code if: 
(1)  the person has one or more prior convictions for an offense specified in clause (iv)  of 
subparagraph (C)  of paragraph (2)  of subdivision (e)  of Section 667 of the Penal Code or for an 
offense requiring registration pursuant to subdivision (c)  of Section 290 of the Penal Code; 
(2)  the person has t:wo  or more prior convictions under subdivision (c);  or 
(3)  the offense resulted in any of the following: 
(A)  violation of Section 1052 of the  Water Code relating to  illegal diversion of water; 
(B)  violation of Section 13260,  13264,  13272,  or 13387 of the  Water Code relating to  discharge 
of waste; 
(C)  violation of Fish and Game Code Section 5650 or Section 5652 of the Fish and Game Code 
relating to  waters of the state; 
(D)  violation of Section 1602 of the Fish and Game Code relating to rivers,  streams and 
lakes; 
(E)  violation of Section 3 7 4. 8 of the Penal Code relating to  hazardous substances or Sections 
25189.5,  25189.6,  or 25189. 7 of the Health and Safety Code relating to hazardous waste; 
(F)  violation of Section 2080 of the Fish and Game Code relating to  endangered and threatened 
species or Section 3513 of the Fish and Game Code relating to  the Migratory Bird Treaty Act; or 
(G)  intentionally or with gross negligence causing substantial environmental harm to public 
lands or other public resources. 

11359. Possession for sale 
Every person who possesses for sale any marijuana, except as otherwise provided by law, shall 
be punished as follows: 
(a)  Every person under the age of 18 who possesses marijuana for sale shall be punished in the 
same manner provided in paragraph (1)  of subdivision (b)  of section 11357. 
(b)  Every person 18 years of age or over who possesses marijuana for sale shall be 
punished by imprisonment in a county jail for a period of not more than six months or by a fine 
of not more than five hundred dollars ($500),  or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Not:withstanding subdivision (b),  a person 18 years of age or over who possesses marijuana 
for sale may be punished by imprisom11ent pursuant to  subdivision (h) of Section 1170 of the 
Penal Code if: 
(1)  the person has one or more prior convictions for an offense specified in clause (iv)  of 
subparagraph (C)  of paragraph (2)  of subdivision (e)  of Section 667 of the Penal Code or for an 
offense requiring registration pursuant to subdivision (c)  of Section 290 of the Penal Code; 
(2)  the person has t:wo  or more prior convictions under subdivision (b);  or 
(3)  the offense occurred in connection with the knowing sale or attempted sale of marijuana to a 
person under the age of 18 years. 
(d)  Not:withstanding subdivision (b),  a person 21 years of age or over who possesses marijuana 
for sale may be punished by imprisonment pursuant to subdivision (h)  of Section 1170 of the 
Penal Code if the offense involves knowingly hiring,  employing,  or using a person 20 years of 
age or younger in unlawfully cultivating,  transporting,  carrying, selling,  offering to sell,  giving 
away, preparing for sale,  or peddling any marijuana. 

54 

11360. Unlawful transportation, importation, sale, or gift 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this section or as  authorized by law, every person who 
transports, imports into this state, sells, furnishes,  administers, or gives away, or offers to 
transport, import into this state, sell, furnish,  administer, or give away, or attempts to import into 
this state or transport any marijuana shall be punished as follows: 
(])Persons under the age of 18 years shall be punished in the same manner as provided in 
paragraph (I) of subdivision (b)  of section 11357. 
(2)  Persons 18 years of age or over shall be punished by imprisonment in a county jail for a 
period of not more than six months or by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500),  or 
by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  Notwithstanding paragraph (2),  a person 18 years of age or over may be punished by 
imprisomnent pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170 of the Penal Code for a period two, 
three, or four years if: 
(A)  the person has one or more prior convictions for an offense specified in clause (iv)  of 
subparagraph (CJ  of paragraph (2)  of subdivision (e)  of Section 667 of the Penal Code or for an 
offense requiring registration pursuant to subdivision (c)  of Section 290 of the Penal Code; 
(BJ  the person has two or more prior convictions under paragraph (2); 
(CJ  the offense involved the knowing sale,  attempted sale,  or the knowing offer to sell, furnish, 
administer or give away marijuana to a person under the age of 18 years; or 
(DJ  the offense involved the import,  offer to  import;  or attempted import into this state,  or the 
transport for sale,  offer to  transport for sale,  or attempted transport for sale out of this state,  of 
more than 28.5 grams of marijuana or more than four grams of concentrated cannabis. 
(b)  Except as authorized by law, every person who gives away, offers to give away, transports, 
offers to transport, or attempts to transport not more than 28.5 grams of marijuana, other than 
concentrated cannabis, is guilty of an infraction misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of 
not more than one hundred dollars ($100).  In any case in which a person is arrested for a 
violation of this subdivision and does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, such person 
shall be released by the arresting officer upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of identity 
and giving his or her written promise to appear in court, as provided in Section 853.6 of the 
Penal Code, and shall not be subjected to booking. 
(c)  For purposes of this section,  "transport" means to  transport for sale. 
(d)  This section does not preclude or limit prosecution for any aiding and abetting or conspiracy 
offenses. 

11361.1. 
(a)  The drug education and counseling requirements under sections 11357,  11358,  11359,  and 
11360 shall be: 
(I) mandatory,  unless the court finds that such drug education or counseling is unnecessary for 
the person,  or that a drug education or counseling program is unavailable; 
(2) free to participants,  and the drug education provide at least four hours of group discussion 
or instruction based on science and evidence-based principles and practices specific to  the use 
and abuse of marijuana and other controlled substances. 
(b)  For good cause,  the court may grant an extension of time not to  exceed 3 0 days for a person 
to  complete the drug education and counseling required under sections 11357,  11358,  11359; 
and 11360. 

55 

Subdivision (a) of Section 11361.5 of the Health and Safety Code is  amended to read: 

11361.5. Destruction of arrest and conviction records; Procedure; Exceptions 
(a) Records of any court of this state, any public or private agency that provides services upon 
referral under Section 1000.2 of the Penal Code, or of any state agency pertaining to the arrest or 
conviction of any person for a violation of subdivision (b),  (c),  (d), or (e)  of Section 11357 or 
subdivision (b) of Section 11360, or pertaining to  the arrest or conviction of any person under 
the age of 18 for a violation of any provision of this article except Section 1135 7.5,  shall not be 
kept beyond two years from the date of the conviction, or from the date of the arrest if there was 
no conviction, except with respect to a violation of subdivision ( ed) of Section 113 57,  or any 
other violation by a person under the age of 18 occurring upon the grounds of, or within, 
any school providing instruction in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12 during hours 
the school is open for classes or school-related programs,  the records shall be retained until the 
offender attains the age of 18 years at which time the records shall be destroyed as provided in 
this section. Any court or agency having custody of the records,  including the statewide criminal 
databases,  shall provide for the timely destruction of the records in accordance with subdivision 
( c ),  and such records must also be purged from the statewide criminal databases.  As used in this 
subdivision,  "records pertaining to  the arrest or conviction" shall include records of arrests 
resulting in the criminal proceeding and records relating to  other offenses charged in the 
accusatory pleading, whether defendant was acquitted or charges were dismissed.  The two-year 
period beyond which records shall not be kept pursuant to  this subdivision shall not apply to  any 
person who is,  at the time at which this subdivision would otherwise require record destruction, 
incarcerated for an offense subject to  this subdivision. For such persons,  the two-year period 
shall begin to  run from the date the person is released from custody.  The requirements of this 
subdivision do not apply to records of any conviction occurring prior to January 1,  1976, or 
records of any arrest not followed by a conviction occurring prior to that date,  or records of any 
arrest for an offense specified in subdivision (c)  of Section 119 2. 7,  or subdivision (c)  of Section 
667.5 of the Penal Code. 

Section 11361.8 is added to the Health and Safety Code to read: 

11361.8 
(a)  A person currently serving a sentence for a conviction,  whether by trial or by open or 
negotiated plea,  who would not have been guilty of an offense or who would have been guilty of 
a lesser offense under the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act had that Act 
been in effect at the time of the offense may petition for a recall or dismissal of sentence before 
the trial court that entered the judgment of conviction in his or her case to request resentencing 
or dismissal in accordance with Sections 11357,  11358,  11359,  11360,  11362.1,  11362.2, 
113 62. 3,  and 113 62. 4 as those sections have been amended or added by this Act. 
(b)  Upon receiving a petition under subdivision (a),  the court shall presume the petitioner 
satisfies the criteria in subdivision (a)  unless the party opposing the petition proves by clear and 
convincing evidence that the petitioner does not satisfy the criteria. If the petitioner satisfies the 
criteria in subdivision (a),  the court shall grant the petition to recall the sentence or dismiss the 
sentence because it is legally invalid unless the court determines that granting the petition would 
pose an unreasonable risk of danger to public safety. 

56 

(1)  In exercising its discretion,  the court may consider,  but shall not be limited to  evidence 
providedfor in subdivision (b)  of Section 1170.18 of the Penal Code. 
(2) As used in this section,  "unreasonable risk of danger to public safety" has the same meaning 
as provided in subdivision (c)  of Section 1170.18 of the Penal Code. 
(c) A person who is serving a sentence and resentenced pursuant to subdivision (b)  shall be 
given credit for any time already served and shall be subject to supervision for one year 
following completion of his or her time in custody or shall be subject to whatever supervision 
time he or she would have otherwise been subject to  after release,  whichever is shorter,  unless 
the court, in its discretion,  as part of its resentencing order,  releases the person from 
supervision.  Such person is subject to parole supervision under Penal Code Section 3000.08 or 
post-release community supervision under subdivision (a)  of Section 3451 of the Penal Code by 
the designated agency and the jurisdiction of the court in the county in which the offender is 
released or resides,  or in which an alleged violation of supervision has occurred, for the purpose 
of hearing petitions to  revoke supervision and impose a term of custody. 
(d)  Under no circumstances may resentencing under this section result in the imposition of a 
term longer than the original sentence,  or the reinstatement of charges dismissed pursuant to a 
negotiated plea agreement. 
(e) A person who has completed his or her sentence for a conviction under Sections 11357, 
11358,  11359,  and 11360,  whether by trial or open or negotiated plea,  who would not have been 
guilty of an offense or who would have been guilty of a lesser offense under the Control, 
Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act had that Act been in effect at the time of the 
offense,  may file an application before the trial court that entered the judgment of conviction in 
his or her case to have the conviction dismissed and sealed because the prior conviction is now 
legally invalid or redesignated as a misdemeanor or infraction in accordance with Sections 
11357,  11358,  11359,  11360,  11362.1,  11362.2,  11362.3,  and 11362.4 as those sections have 
been amended or added by this Act. 
(!)  The  court shall presume the petitioner satisfies the criteria in subdivision (e)  unless the party 
opposing the application proves by clear and convincing evidence that the petitioner does not 
satisfy the criteria in subdivision (e).  Once the applicant satisfies the criteria in subdivision (e), 
the court shall redesignate the conviction as a misdemeanor or infraction or dismiss and seal the 
conviction as legally invalid as now established under the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use 
of Marijuana Act. 
(g)  Unless requested by the applicant,  no hearing is necessary to grant or deny an application 
filed under subdivision (e). 
(h) Any felony conviction that is recalled and resentenced under subdivision (b)  or designated as 
a misdemeanor or infraction under subdivision (!)  shall be considered a misdemeanor or 
infraction for all purposes. Any misdemeanor conviction that is recalled and resentenced under 
subdivision (b)  or designated as an infraction under subdivision(!) shall be considered an 
infraction for all purposes. 
(i) If the court that originally sentenced the petitioner is not available,  the presiding judge shall 
designate another judge to rule on the petition or application. 
(j)  Nothing in this section is intended to  diminish or abrogate any rights or remedies otherwise 
available to  the petitioner or applicant. 
(k) Nothing in this and related sections is intended to diminish or abrogate the finality of 
judgments in any case not falling within the purview of the Control,  Regulate and Tax Adult Use 
of Marijuana Act. 

57 

(l) A resentencing hearing ordered under this act shall constitute a  ''post-conviction release 
proceeding" under paragraph (7)  of subdivision (b)  of Section 28 of Article I of the California 
Constitution (Marsy's Law). 
(m)  The provisions of this section shall apply equally to juvenile delinquency adjudications and 
dispositions under Section 602 of the  Welfare and Institutions Code if the juvenile would not 
have been guilty of an offense or would have been guilty of a lesser offense under the Control, 
Regulate and Tax Adult Use  of Marijuana Act. 
(l)  The Judicial Council shall promulgate and make available all necessary forms to  enable the 
filing of the petitions and applicationsprovided in this section. 

SECTION 9.  INDUSTRIAL HEMP. 

Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code is  amended to read as follows: 

11018. 5. Industrial hemp 
(a)  "Industrial hemp" means a fiber or oilseed crop, or both, that is limited to nonpsychoactive 
types of the plant Cannabis sativa L. and the seed produced therefrom, having no more than 
three-tenths of 1 percent tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) contained in the dried flowering tops, 
whether growing or not; and that is cultivated and processed exclusively for the purpose of 
producing the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from 
the seeds of the plant;, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and or any other every 
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,  its seeds or mature 
stalks, except the resin or flov1ering tops extracted produced therefrom, fiber,  oil, or cake, or the 
sterilized seed, or any component of the seed, of the plant that is incapable of gennination. 
(b)  The possession,  use, purchase, sale,  cultivation, processing,  manufacture, packaging, 
labeling,  transporting,  storage,  distribution,  use and transfer of industrial hemp shall not be 
subject to the provisions of this Division or of Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, 
but instead shall be regulated by the Department of Food and Agriculture in accordance with the 
provisions of Division 24 of the Food and Agricultural Code,  inclusive. 

Sections 81000, 81006, 81008, and 81010 of the Food and Agricultural Code are amended to 
read, and Section 81007 of the Food and Agricultural Code is repealed as follows: 

81000. Definitions 
For purposes of this division, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(a) "Board" means the Industrial Hemp Advisory Board. 
(b) "Commissioner" means the county agricultural commissioner. 
( c) "Established agricultural research institution" means a public or private institution or 
organization that maintains land for agricultural research, including colleges, universities, 
agricultural research centers, and conservation research centers. 
any institution that is either: 
(1)  a public or private institution or organization that maintains land or facilities for 
agricultural research,  including colleges,  universities,  agricultural research centers,  and 
conservation research centers; or 
(2)  an institution of higher education (as  defined in Section 1001 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20  USC. 1001))  that  grows,  cultivates  or  manufactures  industrial  hemp  for 

58 

purposes  of research conducted under an agricultural pilot program or other agricultural or 
academic research. 
( d) "Industrial hemp" has the same meaning as that tennis defined in Section 11018.5 of the 
Health and Safety Code. 
( e) "Secretary" means the Secretary of Food and Agriculture. 
(f) "Seed breeder" means an individual or public or private institution or organization that is 
registered with the commissioner to develop seed cultivars intended for sale or research. 
(g) "Seed cultivar" means a variety of industrial hemp. 
(h) "Seed development plan" means a strategy devised by a seed breeder, or applicant seed 
breeder, detailing his or her plam1ed approach to growing and developing a new seed cultivar for 
industrial hemp. 

81006. Industrial hemp growth limitations; Prohibitions; Imports; Laboratory testing 
(a)(l) Except when grown by an established agricultural research institution or a registered seed 
breeder, industrial hemp shall be grown only as a densely planted fiber or oilseed crop, or both, 
in acreages of not less than five acres one-tenth of an acre at the same time, and no portion of an 
acreage of industrial hemp shall include plots of less than one contiguous acre. 
(2) Registered seed breeders, for purposes of seed production, shall only grow industrial hemp as 
a densely planted crop in acreages of not less than one-tenth of an twe-acres at the same time, 
and no portion of the acreage of industrial hemp shall include plots ofless than one contiguous 
-acre. 
(3) Registered seed breeders, for purposes of developing a new California seed cultivar, shall 
grow industrial hemp as densely as possible in dedicated acreage of not less than one-tenth of an 
acre and in accordance with the seed development plan. The entire area of the dedicated acreage 
is not required to be used for the cultivation of the particular seed cultivar. 
(b) Ornamental and clandestine cultivation of industrial hemp is prohibited. All plots shall have 
adequate signage indicating they are industrial hemp. 
(c) Pruning and tending of individual industrial hemp plants is prohibited, except when grown by 
an established agricultural research institution or when the action is necessary to perfonn the 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) testing described in this section. 
( d) Culling of industrial hemp is prohibited, except when grown by an established agricultural 
research institution, when the action is necessary to perform the THC testing described in this 
section, or for purposes of seed production and development by a registered seed breeder. 
( e)  Industrial hemp shall include products imported under the Hannonized Tariff Schedule of the 
United States (2013) of the United States International Trade Commission, including, but not 
limited to, hemp seed, per subheading 1207.99.03, hemp oil, per subheading 1515.90.80, oilcake, 
per subheading 2306.90.01, true hemp, perheading 5302, true hemp yam, per subheading 
5308.20.00, and woven fabrics of true hemp fibers, per subheading 5311.00.40. 
(f) Except when industrial hemp is grown by an established agricultural research institution, a 
registrant that grows industrial hemp under this section shall, before the harvest of each crop and 
as provided below, obtain a laboratory test report indicating the THC levels of a random 
sampling of the dried flowering tops of the industrial hemp grown. 
(1)  Sampling shall occur as soon as practicable when the THC content of the leaves surrounding 
the seeds is at its peak and shall cmmnence as the seeds begin to mature, when the first seeds of 
approximately 50 percent of the plants are resistant to compression. 

59 

(2) The entire fruit-bearing part of the plant including the seeds shall be used as a sample. The 
sample cut shall be made directly underneath the inflorescence found in the top one-third of the 
plant. 
(3) The sample collected for THC testing shall be accompanied by the following documentation: 
(A) The registrant's proof of registration. 
(B)  Seed certification documentation for the seed cultivar used. 
(C) The THC testing report for each certified seed cultivar used. 
( 4) The laboratory test report shall be issued by a laboratory registered with the federal Drug 
Enforcement Administration, shall state the percentage content of THC, shall indicate the date 
and location of samples taken, and shall state the Global Positioning System coordinates and 
total acreage of the crop. If the laboratory test report indicates a percentage content of THC that 
is equal to or less than three-tenths of 1 percent, the words "PASSED AS  CALIFORNIA 
INDUSTRIAL HEMP" shall appear at or near the top of the laboratory test report. If the 
laboratory test report indicates a percentage content of THC that is greater than three-tenths of 1 
percent, the words "FAILED AS  CALIFORNIA INDUSTRIAL HEMP" shall appear at or near 
the top of the laboratory test report. 
(5) If the laboratory test report indicates a percentage content of THC that is equal to  or less than 
three-tenths of 1 percent, the laboratory shall provide the person who requested the testing not 
less than 10 original copies signed by an employee authorized by the laboratory and shall retain 
one or more original copies of the laboratory test report for a minimum of two years from its date 
of sampling. 
(6) If the laboratory test report indicates a percentage content of THC that is greater than three(cid:173)
tenths of 1 percent and does not exceed 1 percent, the registrant that grows industrial hemp shall 
submit additional samples for testing of the industrial hemp grown. 
(7) A registrant that grows industrial hemp shall destroy the industrial hemp grown upon receipt 
of a first laboratory test report indicating a percentage content of THC that exceeds 1 percent or a 
second laboratory test report pursuant to paragraph (6) indicating a percentage content of THC 
that exceeds three-tenths of 1 percent but is less than 1 percent. If the percentage content of THC 
exceeds 1 percent, the destruction shall take place within 48 hours after receipt of the laboratory 
test report. If the percentage content of THC in the second laboratory test report exceeds three(cid:173)
tenths of 1 percent but is less than 1 percent, the destruction shall take place as  soon as 
practicable, but no later than 45 days after receipt of the second test report. 
(8) A registrant that intends to grow industrial hemp and who complies with this section shall not 
be prosecuted for the cultivation or possession of marijuana as a result of a laboratory test report 
that indicates a percentage content of THC that is greater than three-tenths of 1 percent but does 
not exceed 1 percent. 
(9) Established agricultural research institutions shall be pennitted to  cultivate or possess 
industrial hemp with a laboratory test report that indicates a percentage content of THC that is 
greater than three-tenths of 1 percent if that cultivation or possession contributes to the 
development of types of industrial hemp that will comply with the three-tenths of 1 percent THC 
limit established in this division. 
(10) Except for an established agricultural research institution, a registrant that grows industrial 
hemp shall retain an original signed copy of the laboratory test report for two years from its date 
of sampling, make an original signed copy of the laboratory test report available to the 
department, the commissioner, or law enforcement officials or their designees upon request, and 
shall provide an original copy of the laboratory test report to  each person purchasing, 

60 

transporting, or otherwise obtaining from the registrant that grows industrial hemp the fiber, oil, 
cake, or seed, or any component of the seed, of the plant. 
(g) If, in the Attorney General's opinion issued pursuant to Section 8 of the act that added this 
division, it is determined that the provisions of this section are not sufficient to comply with 
federal law, the department, in consultation with the board, shall establish procedures for this 
section that meet the requirements of federal law. 

81007. Prohibitions; De minimis considerations 
(a) Except as provided in subdivision (b) or as necessary to perform testing pursuant to 
subdivision (f) of Section 81006, the possession, outside of a field oflawful cultivation, of resin, 
flowering tops, or leaves that have been removed from the hemp plant is prohibited. 
(b) The presence of a de minimis amount, or insignificant number, of hemp leaves or flov101ing 
tops in hemp bales that result from the nonnal and appropriate processing of industrial hemp 
shall not constitute possession of marijuana. 

81008. Attorney General reports; Requirements 
(a) Not later than January 1, 2019, or five years after the provisions of this division m·e 
authorized under federal lmv, whichever is later, the Attorney General shall report to the 
Assembly and Senate C01mnittees on Agriculture and the Assembly and Senate Committees on 
Public Safety the reported incidents, if any, of the following: 
(1) A field of industrial hemp being used to disguise marijuana cultivation. 
(2) Claims in a court hearing by persons other than those exempted in subdivision (f) of Section 
81006 that marijuana is industrial hemp. 
(b) A report submitted pursuant to  subdivision (a) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 
9795 of the Government Code. 
( c) Pursuant to Section 10231.5 of the Government Code, this section is repealed on January 1, 
2023, or four.years after the date that the report is due, whichever is later. 

81010. Operation of division 
(a)  This division,  and Section 221  of the Food and Agricultural Code,  shall net become 
operative unless authorized under federal lav1 on January 1,  2017. 
(b)  The possession,  use, purchase, sale, production,  manufacture, packaging,  labeling, 
transporting,  storage,  distribution,  use,  and transfer of industrial hemp shall be regulated in 
accordance with this division.  The Bureau of Marijuana Control has authority to regulate and 
conttol plants and products that fit within the definition of industrial hemp but that are 
produced, processed,  manufactured,  tested,  delivered,  or otherwise handled pursuant to a license 
issued under Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code. 

SECTION 10.  AMENDMENT. 

This Act shall be broadly construed to accomplish its purposes and intent as  stated in Section 3. 
The Legislature may by majority vote amend the provisions of this Act contained in Sections 5 
and 6 to implement the substantive provisions of those sections, provided that such amendments 
are consistent with and further the purposes and intent of this Act as stated in Section 3. 
Amendments to this Act that enact protections for employees and other workers of licensees 
under Section 6 of this Act that are in addition to the protections provided for in this Act or that 

61 

otherwise expand the legal rights of such employees or workers of licensees under Section 6 of 
this Act shall be deemed to be consistent with and further the purposes and intent of this Act. 
The Legislature may by majority vote amend, add, or repeal any provisions to  further reduce the 
penalties for any of the offenses addressed by this Act. Except as  otherwise provided, the 
provisions of the Act may be amended by a two-thirds vote of the Legislature to  further the 
purposes and intent of the Act. 

SECTION 11.  CONSTRUCTION AND INTEPRETATION. 

The provisions of this Act shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes and intent of the 
Control, Regulate and Tax the Adult Use of Marijuana Act; provided, however, no provision or 
provisions of this Act shall be interpreted or construed in a mam1er to  create a positive conflict 
with federal law, including the federal Controlled Substances Act, such that the provision or 
provisions of this Act and federal law cannot consistently stand together. 

SECTION 12.  SEVERABILITY. 

If any provision in this Act, or part thereof, or the application of any provision or part to  any 
person or circumstance is held for any reason to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining 
provisions and parts shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end 
the provisions of this Act are severable. 

SECTION 13. CONFLICTING INITIATIVES. 

In the event that this measure and another measure or measures concerning the control, 
regulation, and taxation of marijuana, medical marijuana, or industrial hemp appear on the same 
statewide election ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be 
in conflict with this measure.  In the event that this measure receives a greater number of 
affinnative votes, the provisions of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the provisions 
of the other measure shall be null and void. 

62 

