1 5  - 0  1 0  9  Amdt.#  I 

~CEIVCl) 

DEC  1 8 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

December 14, 2015 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
PO Box 994255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-25550 

Re: AG Initiative #15-0109 - Technical Amendment 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

With this letter we submit a proposed statewide ballot measure ("Stop the Train-to-Nowhere 

Act of 2016") in accordance with Article II of Section 10( d)  of the California Constitution.  We are 
the proponents of the measure and registered voters in the State of California. 

These amendments are reasonably germane to the theme, purpose or subject of the measure 

as  originally proposed. 

Thank you for your time and attention. 

Sincerely, 

1 5  - 0  1 0  9  Arndt#  J 

INITIATIVE MEASURE TO BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

SECTION 1.  Title 

This initiative shall be known and may be referred to as the Stop the Train-to-Nowhere Act 
of 2016. · 

SECTION 2.  Findings and Purposes 

A. Findings 

(1) In 2008, the voters approved Proposition lA, which authorized the State of 

California to issue up to $9.95 billion in bonds to construct a high-speed train system and 
established the framework and requirements that the system would be required to achieve. 

(2) Since the passage of Proposition lA, the voters have learned that the high-speed 

train system will not be able to meet any of the requirements of that measure. 

(a) estimated construction costs for the project have more than doubled; 

(b) promised travel times will be significantly longer; 

(c)  travel speeds will be significantly slower than the "high speed" 200 miles-an(cid:173)

hour speeds; 

(d) train routes will have intrusive impacts on communities and the environment; 

( e) the project has obtained no commitments of private financing and will not be 

financially viable without significant ongoing public subsidies in the tens of 
billions of dollars; and, 

(f) technology advances have made obsolete the design concept approved by voters. 

(3) Despite claims by the High-Speed Rail Authority that "California high-speed rail 

will connect the mega-regions of the state, contribute to economic development and a 
cleaner environment, create jobs and preserve agricultural and protected lands," 

(a) the train currently is programmed only to connect the rural farm 

communities of Chowchilla and Shafter in Central California; 

(b) it will take longer to travel the distance between these rural communities by 

train than by auto; 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

1 

( c)  the most efficient prospective use of the train between Chowchilla and Shafter 
may be to transport prisoners between the state prisons currently located in or 
near those communities, hardly justification for such a mammoth project; 

(d) the project will seize long-established family farmland throughout the region; 

( e) the current design targets low-income agricultural communities unfairly and 

disproportionally leaving those communities to bear the burden of the 
environmental and economic impacts; and, 

(f) the U.S. Congress has committed to provide no further federal funding for the 

project. 

· ( 4) After the High-Speed Rail Authority solicited potential private and foreign 

government investment interest, these investors resoundingly expressed skepticism the 
project would ever be funded without substantial public subsidies and cast doubt upon 
further private financing of the venture. 

B. Purposes 

(1) Amend the Safe, Reliable High-Speed Passenger Train Bond Act to provide that 

no further bonds shall be sold for high-speed rail and rail-related purposes; 

(2) Allow the High-Speed Rail Authority to continue to study the  feasibility of 

completing the full route from San Francisco to Los Angeles with connections to 
Sacramento and San Diego, that would meet the specifications set forth in Proposition 1A, 
including  design work, environmental studies, approvals, permitting, and research and 
development activities for the entire project, not for discrete segments of it, but may only 
carry out such activities if funded by continuing annual appropriations by the Legislature 
from state general funds and not from Proposition 1A bond funds. 

(3) If such activities are not completed by December 31, 2025, or if the activities do 
not demonstrate both the originally-designed and voter-approved project's feasibility and 
budget, or both, the California High Speed Rail Authority shall be wound down and 
terminated. 

( 4) Explicitly authorize the net proceeds received from outstanding bonds issued 
and sold prior to the effective date of the initiative to be redirected from high-speed rail 
purposes to any other purpose authorized by the voters in a separate vote at the same 
election as this measure; and 

(5) If voters approve this initiative but fail to adopt, at the same election, another 
initiative redirecting high-speed rail bond net proceeds, require that any such bond net 
proceeds be redirected to retiring the debt incurred from the issuance and sale of those 
outstanding bonds. 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

2 

SECTION 3.  Stop the Train-to-Nowhere Act of 2016 

A. Amendments to the Streets and Highways Code 

(1) Section 2704.045 is added to the Streets and Highways Code to read as follows: 

2704.045.  Notwithstanding Section 2704.04, it is the intent of the people of California that 
no further bonds shall be issued and sold for purposes of Sections 2704.06 on and after the 
effective date of this section. 

(2) Section 2704.096 is added to the Streets and Highways Code to read as follows: 

2704.096. 

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no further bonds shall be 

issued and sold for purposes of Sections 2704.06 on and after the effective date of this 
section. 

(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the net proceeds received 

from outstanding bonds issued and sold pursuant to Sections 2704.06 prior to the effective 
date of this section may be redirected from those high-speed rail purposes for: 

(1) Any other purpose or use upon approval by the voters approving an initiative 
measure voted on at the same election as the initiative measure adopting this 
section; or 

(2) If the voters fail to appropriate the net proceeds by adopting an initiative 
measure at the same election as the initiative measure adopting this section, then 
such net proceeds shall be used to retire the debt incurred from the issuance and 
sale of those outstanding bonds. 

(3)  Section 2704.78 is added to the Streets and Highways Code to read as follows: 

2704.78. 

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, bond funds made available 

pursuant to Chapter 20 (commencing with Section 2704) shall not be expended for high(cid:173)
speed rail purposes, and no additional bonds shall be issued or sold pursuant to that 
chapter, on and after the effective date of this section. 

(b) This subsection shall not preclude the use of bond proceeds for any other use 

approved by the voters in adopting an initiative measure at the same election as the 
initiative measure adopting this section. 

(c) This subdivision shall not preclude the use of bond proceeds to retire high-speed 

rail bond debt to the extent authorized by law. 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

3 

B.  Amendments to the Public Utilities Code 

(1)  Chapter 6 is added to Division 19.5 of the Public Utilities Code to read as follows: 

Chapter 6.  Restrictions on Authority Operations 

Article 1.  Definitions 

185600.  Definitions. 

For purposes of this Chapter: 

(a) "Net proceeds" means the proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to 
Sections 2704.06 of the Streets and Highways Code and deposited in the High-Speed 
Passenger Train Bond Fund created by Section 2704.05 of the Streets and Highways Code. 

(b) "Enforceable obligation" means: 

(1) bonds issued pursuant to Sections 2704.06 of the Streets and Highways Code, 
including the required debt service, reserve set-asides and any other payments required 
under the indenture or similar documents governing the issuance of the outstanding bonds 
of the Authority; 

(2) loans of money borrowed by the Authority for a lawful purpose; 

(3) payments required by the federal government, preexisting obligations to the 

state or obligations imposed by state law, or legally enforceable payments required in 
connection with the Authority's employees, including but not limited to, pension payments, 
pension obligation debt service, and unemployment payments; 

( 4) judgments or settlements entered by a competent court of law or binding 

arbitration decision against the Authority; 

(5) any legally binding and enforceable agreement or contract that is not otherwise 

void as violating the debt limit or public policy; 

(6) contracts or agreements necessary for the continued administration and 

operation of the Authority, to the extent permitted by this Chapter. 

Article 2.  Suspension of Authority Activities 

185610.  Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, including but not limited to Chapters 
1 through 5 of this Code, and Chapter 20 of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code, 
except as provided in Section 185614, commencing on the effective date of this Chapter, the 
Authority shall not have the authority to, and shall not, do any of the following: 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

4 

(a) incur new or expand existing monetary or legal obligations; 

(b) incur indebtedness, including but not limited to issuing or selling bonds, taking 

out or accepting loans or advances, executing trust deeds or mortgages on any real or 
personal property, pledging or encumbering any revenues or assets; 

( c) make loans or advances or enter into agreements to provide financial assistance 

of any sort to any entity or person for any purpose; 

( d) enter into any contracts with, incur obligations, or make commitments to any 

entity, whether governmental or private, or any individual or groups of individuals, for any 
purpose; 

(e) amend or modify existing agreements, obligations or commitments with any 

entity or individual for any purpose; 

(t) dispose of assets by sale, long-term lease, gift, grant, exchange, transfer, 

assignment, or otherwise, for any purpose; 

(g) acquire real property by any means for any purpose; 

(h) transfer, assign, vest, or delegate any of its assets, funds, rights, powers, 

ownership interests, or obligations for any purpose to any entity or individual; 

(i)  enter into new partnerships, become a member in a joint powers authority, 

create new entities, or take on or agree to any new duties or obligations as a member or 
otherwise of any entity to which the Authority belongs or with which it is in any way 
associated; 

U) increase the pay, benefits or contributions of any sort for any officer, employee, 

consultant, contractor, or any other goods or service provider that had not previously been 
contracted; 

(k) provide optional or discretionary bonuses to any officers, employees, 

consultants, contractors, or any other service or goods providers; 

(I) increase numbers of staff employed by the Authority beyond the number 

required as of the effective date of this Chapter; 

(m) begin any condemnation proceeding or begin the process to acquire real 

property by eminent domain; and, 

( n) any other action, except as explicitly authorized by this Chapter. 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

5 

185611.  This Chapter is intended to preserve, to the maximum extent possible, the 
revenues and assets of the Authority so that those assets and revenues that are not needed 
to pay for enforceable obligations may be used only (a) for a purpose explicitly approved 
by voters adopting a separate measure voted on at the same election as this measure, or, 
(b) ifno such measure described in subdivision (a) is on the ballot at the same election as 
this measure, to retire high-speed rail bond debt received from outstanding bonds issued 
and sold, pursuant to Sections 2704.06-ofthe Streets and Highways Code, prior to the 
effective date of this Chapter.  It is the intent of the People that the Authority take no 
actions that would further deplete the corpus of the Authority's funds regardless of their 
original source.  All provisions of this Chapter shall be construed as broadly as possible to 
support this intent and to restrict the expenditure of funds to the fullest extent possible. 

185612.  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to interfere with the Authority's 
authority, pursuant to enforceable obligations as defined in this Chapter, to make payments 
due, enforce existing covenants and obligations, or perform its obligations. 

185613.  Except as provided in section 185614, and after the effective date of this Chapter, 
the Authority shall only do the following: 

(a) Within 60 days of the effective date of this Chapter, the Authority shall adopt an 
enforceable obligation payment schedule, which includes the following information about 
each obligation: 

(1) the project name associated with the obligation; 

(2) the payee; 

(3) a short description of the nature of the work, product, service, facility, or other 

thing of value for which payment is to be made; 

( 4) the amount of payments obligated to be made, both the aggregate total of the 

obligation and the monthly amount required to be paid; 

(5) any other information the Authority or the Controller deems appropriate. 

(b) Upon adoption of the enforceable obligation payment schedule, the Authority 

shall make payments to completely satisfy the obligation as soon as possible, based on the 
availability of funds.  Payment schedules may be aggregated as appropriate.  The Authority 
shall not make a payment unless it is listed in an adopted enforceable obligation payment 
schedule, other than payments required to meet obligations with respect to bonded 
indebtedness. 

(c) Perform obligations required pursuant to any enforceable obligation. 

( d) Set aside or maintain reserves in the amount required by indentures, trust 

indentures, or similar documents governing the issuance of bonds; 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

6 

( e) Consistent with the intent declared in Section 185611, preserve all assets, 

minimize all liabilities, and preserve all records of the Authority; 

(f) Take all reasonable measures to avoid triggering an event of default under any 

enforceable obligation. 

185614. 

(a) The Authority may study the feasibility of completing the full route from San 

Francisco to Los Angeles with connections to Sacramento and San Diego, that would meet 
the specifications set forth in Proposition 1A, including design work, environmental 
studies, approvals, permitting, and research and development activities for the entire 
project, not for discrete segments of it. 

(b) The activities authorized in subsection (a)  may only be funded by continuing 

annual appropriations by the Legislature from state general funds, and not from 
Proposition 1A bond funds. 

(c) If the activities authorized in subsection (a) are not completed by December 31, 

2025, or at any earlier date if the activities do not demonstrate both the originally-designed 
and voter-approved project's feasibility and budget, or both, the California High Speed Rail 
Authority shall be wound down and dissolved as provided for in Article 3 of this Chapter. 

Article 3.  Winding Down and Dissolution of Authority 

185620.  Upon satisfaction of all enforceable obligations identified in the enforceable 
obligation payment schedule, and upon the occurrence set forth in subsection ( c) of Section 
185614 of this Chapter, the Authority shall be dissolved and shall no longer exist as a 
public body, corporate or politic. 

SECTION 4.  Implementation and Interpretation 

A. Severability 

If any part of this measure or the application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, 
the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications which can reasonably be 
given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of 
this measure are severable. 

B. Conflicting measures 

This measure is intended to be comprehensive. It is the intent of the People that in the 
event this measure or measures relating to the same subject shall appear on the same 
statewide election ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed 
to be in conflict with this measure. In the event that this measure receives a greater 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

7 

number of affirmative votes, the provisions of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, 
and all provisions of the other measure or measures shall be null and void. 

C.  Interpretation 

This measure shall not be interpreted or applied to interfere with or supplant any valid 
contracts or other binding obligations pre-existing the adoption of this measure by the 
voters. 

D.  Proponent Standing 

The People of the State of California declare that the proponent of this measure has a direct 
and personal stake in defending this measure and grant formal authority to the proponent 
to defend this measure in any legal proceeding, either by intervening in such legal 
proceeding, or by defending the measure on behalf of the people and the State in the event 
that the State declines to defend the measure or declines to appeal an adverse judgment 
against the measure. 

In the event that the proponent is defending this measure in a legal proceeding because the 
State has declined to defend it or to appeal an adverse judgment against it, the proponent 
shall: act as an agent of the people and the State; be subject to all ethical, legal, and 
fiduciary duties applicable to such parties in such legal proceedings; take and be subject to 
the Oath of Office prescribed by Article XX, section 3 of the California Constitution for the 
limited purpose of acting on behalf of the people and the State in such legal proceeding; and 
be entitled to recover reasonable legal fees and related costs from the State. 

AG 15-0109 12/14/15 V. 2 

8 

