MITCHELL J. PEARCE  D.C., M.S., L.Ac.,  D.A.C.B.N. 

1 5  - 0  1 2  3 

1591 Williamsport Drive 
San Jose, CA 95131-3327 
Tel: 408-293-3883 
Fax: 408-889-2669 
Email: DrPearce@BetterHealer.com 
Chiropractic  License #DC14535 

Certified Chiropractic Sports Practitioner 
Diplomate of the American 
Clinical Board of Nutrition 
Master of Science in 
Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Acupuncture License #AC4378 

December 24, 2015 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
1300 I Street 17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Dear Ashley Johansson: 

DEC  2 8 2015 

INITIATIVE COOfmlNATOR 

ATTORNEY GENEHAL'S OFFICE 

Pursuant to Article II,  Section 10( d) of the California Constitution, I am submitting the attached 
proposed statewide ballot measure to your office and request that you prepare a circulating title 
and summary of the measure as provided by law. Also enclosed is my check # 5772 in the 
amount of$200.00 made payable to the State of California. 

My statement pursuant to California Elections Code section 9001  is: 

I, Mitchell Jameson Pearce, declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United 
States, 18 years of age or older, and a resident of Santa Clara County, California. My public 
contact information is: 

Address: 
Phone Number: 
Email: 

1591  Williamsport Drive, San Jose, CA 95131-3327 
408-293-3883 

My statement pursuant t  California Elections Code section 9608 is: 

I, Mitchell Jameson Pearce, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 
18650 of the Elections Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an initiative 
petition to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the proposed measure for the 
ballot. I certify that I will not knowingly or willingly allow the signatures for this initiative to be 
used for any purpose other than qualification of the measure for the ballot. 

~~~~~~~~~~::::-:::S1ijgfrjn:aattuurrneeooff Proponent Dated this 24th day of December 2015 

Re:  Act to Protect the Privacy of Healthcare Decisions 

Page 1 of 1 

December 24, 2015 

1 5  - 0  1 2  3 

AN ACT TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY OF HEALTH CARE DECISIONS 

Having included in the California Constitution Article Section 1 which reads: 

All people are by nature free  and independent and have  inalienable rights.  Among these 
are  enjoying  and  defending  life  and  liberty,  acquiring,  possessing,  and  protecting 
property, and pursuing and obtaining safety, happiness, and privacy. 

we, the people of California, find, declare, and enact as a new section of the Health and Safety Code: 

a) Decisions regarding whether, how, or when to treat, prevent, manage, or end; and from which 

licensed health practitioner to seek such treatment, management, end, or prevention of an illness or 
medical condition are the private decision of the individual ifhe or she has reached the age of majority 
or is an emancipated minor, or the individual's parent or legal guardian if the individual is a minor. 

b) No person may be deprived of a public right, benefit, privilege, service, or immunity; or 

refused service, accommodation, employment, or compensation by any business, or compensation by 
any employer, because of his or her choice or choices concerning his or her health care unless the person 
is infected with a communicable disease, regardless of whether the person is exhibiting signs or 
symptoms of the disease, that may cause permanent injury or death to a healthy individual; is a danger to 
himself or others; is of unsound mind; has lost his civil rights as a result of being convicted of a crime; 
or is addicted to any substance, including but not limited to alcohol, that interferes with maintaining a 
healthy mind and/or body. Unless applied to persons who've lost their civil rights through due process 
of law, any such deprivation must be limited to only the purpose of protecting public health and safety 
and minimized to the extent practicable. 

c) For purposes of this act, a healthy person is one who has no symptoms or signs of disease, is 
not addicted to or dependant on any substance that alters normal physiology, and is not infected with a 
communicable disease. 

d) Any person infected with a communicable disease that must be reported to public health 

authorities does not lose the right to decide on treatment of the disease upon reporting the disease, but 
must obey public health authorities' orders, such as quarantine orders, that are for the purpose of 
preventing spread of the disease.  No infected person subject to such orders owes any liability to any 
entity or other person who knowingly violates those orders. 

e) Nothing in this act shall expand or reduce any obligations of the public or any business under 

any previous act of the legislature or Congress concerning accommodating persons with diseases or 
disabilities. Nor shall any provision of this act expand or reduce any rights guaranteed by the California 
or United States Constitutions. 

f) If any provision of this act or part thereof is found to be in conflict with the California 

Constitution or United States Constitution, the remaining provisions and parts shall remain in full force 
and effect, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. 

g)  Any statute, law, regulation, or executive order contrary to or in conflict with this initiative act 

is null and void upon passage of this act. 

