15-0125 

California Department of Justice 
PO  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 
Attn: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

R:  15-0125, "Honest Legislator Program Act" -Amended version 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

1 

5  - o 1 2  5  Arndt#  I 

February 1, 2016 

RECEIVED 

FEB  O 3 2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Please use the attached amended language of my proposed initiative to prepare a title and summary. 
After my amended initiative, is a listing of the parts of the initiative that changed from the original 
version submitted on December 29, 2015. 

Thank you for your assistance in this matter. 

~ ;0-~---··-.. 

· Robert Owen Bernstein 
2518 Los Feliz Way 
Carmichael, California 95609 
(916) 487-0337 

15-0125 

SECTION l. Title. 

1 5  - 0  1 2  5  Arndt#  I 

This Act shall be known and may be cited as the Honest Legislator Program Act. 

SECTION 2. Findings and Declarations. 

The People of the State of California hereby find and declare that: 
a. The State Senate has been a disgrace to the people of California after 3 members were convicted of 
or plead guilty to, various crimes, including lying about their primary residence. 
b. Several Legislators have left the Legislature during their term to take high paying jobs with 
companies that have lobbied the Legislature. 
c. Voters have lost confidence in the Legislature. 

SECTION 3. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. 

To ensure that Legislators are open and honest with the people of California, the People hereby 
amend the Constitution to: 
a. Require Legislators and candidates for the legislature, to take lie detector tests in order to provide 
trnthful information to the citizens of California. 
b. Require the immediate non-paid suspension of any legislator who is indicted for any felony. 
c. Allow the Fair Political Practices Commission to recommend to the State Supreme Court the 
removal from office of any Legislator who may have committed a felony or not upheld their oath of 
office. 
d. Clarify that Legislators are not employees and have no rights as employees and no contractual 
rights. 
e. Remove constitutional special treatment for legislators. 
f. Remove power from certain Legislators. 
g. Remove any privacy rights as it relates to issues that influence Legislative actions. 

SECTION 4.  Amendments to Article I of the California Constitution. 

Section 4.1. Section 3 (b)(6) of Article I of the California Constitution is amended to read: 
SEC. 3(b )(6) Nothing in this subdivisian repeals, nullifies, supersedes, or modifies p~  
eanfidentiality ofpreceedings and records of the Legislature, the Members of the Legislature, and its 
empleyees, cammittees, and caucuses provided by Sectioa 7 of Article IV, state la>.v,  or legislative rules 
adapted in-furtherance afthose provisians; nar does it affect the scape ofpennitted discovery in 
j,udieial or administrative proceedings regarding deliberations af the Legislature, the Member-s-efihe 
Legislature, and its employ-ees, cammittees, and caucuses. 

Section 4.2. Section 31  (i) of Article I of the California Constitution is added to read: 
Article 1, SEC. 31.  (i) The State shall not grant preferential treatment to any current or former elected 
individual in the operation of public employment, public education, or public contracting. 

15-0125 

SECTION 5.  Amendments to Article III of the California Constitution. 

Section 5.1  Section 4(c)(l) of Article 3 is added to read: 
SEC. 4.  {c)(l) Legislators do not receive UQrmal salaries and. are not employees. {2) Legislators are 
volunteer public servants that are paid, but they do not have any rights, benefits or privileges that are 
nart of a paid position, including, but not limited to: Vjlcation credits/pay, sick leave credits/pay, state 
retirement benefits. unemployment insurance, disability insurance or other normal ~mployment 
benefits. {3) Their compensation will be taxed as if it is a normal salan: for state income tax purposes. 
{4) Legislators have no contractual rights or protections. 

SECTION 6.  Amendments to Article IV of the California Constitution. 

Section 6.1 Section 2(c) is amended to read: 
SEC 2. ( c) A person is ineligible to be a member of the Legislature unless the person is an elector and has been 
a resident in their sole ptimary residence, of the legislative district for one year, and a citizen of the United 
States and a resident of California for 3 years, immediately preceding the filing deadline for the election, and 
service of the full term of office to which the person is seeking to be elected would not exceed the maximum 
years of service permitted by subdivision ( a) of this section. Persons elected to such office must continue to 
live in their sole primary residence, in the legislative district they were elected to represent during their term of 
office, or they shall be removed from office. 

Section 6.2 Section J(b) and (c) is amended to read: 
SEC. 3. (b) The Legislature session shall not adjourn until at least ten days after they have taken at least one 
vote on every bill introduced in their respective houses. 
(b~) On extraordinary occasions the Governor by proclamation may cause the Legislature to assemble in 
special session. When so assembled it has power to legislate only on subjects specified in the proclamation but 
may provide for expenses and other matters incidental to the session. 

15-0125 

Section 6.3 Section 4(a) is amended to read: 
SEC. 4.  (a) To eliminate any appearance of a conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties and 
responsibilities, no Member of the Legislature may knowingly receive any salary, wages, commissions, or 
other similar earned income from a lobbyist or lobbying firm, as defined by the Political Reform Act of 197 4, 
or from a person who, during the previous H48 months, has been under a contract with the Legislature or from 
any person or business who has contacted any member of the Legislature during the previous 48 months, about 
supporting or opposing or amending any current or proposed legislation. The Legislature shall enact laws that 
define earned income. However, earned income does not include any community property interest in the 
income of a spouse. Any Member who knowingly receives any salary, wages, commissions, or other similar 
earned income from a lobbyist employer, as defined by the Political Reform Act of 197 4, shall be removed 
from office.  Any member who receives any salary, wages. commissions, or other similar earned income from 
any person or business who has contacted any member of the Legislature during the previous 48 months, about 
supporting or opposing or amending any current or proposed legislation may not, for a period of ooe four year~ 
following its receipt, vote upon or make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use his or her official 
position to influence an action or decision before the Legislature, other than an action or decision invoh<ing a 
bill described in subdivision (c) of Section 12 ofthis article, which he or she knows, or has reason to know, 
would have a direct and significant financial impact on the person or business from whom they received the 
income  lobbyist e111ployer and ·.vould not impact the public generally or a significant segment of the public ifl 
a similar manner. A,s used in this subdwision, "public generally" includes an industry, trade, or profession. 

Section 6.4 Sections 5(e) through (h) are amended to read: 
SEC  5. ( e) The Legislature shall enact laws that prohibit a Member of the Legislature whose term of office 
commences on or after December 3, 1990, from lobbying, for compensation, as governed by the Political 
Reform Act of 1974, before the Legislature for 12 months after leaving office. 
(f) Any member of the Legislator who is elected after November 7, 2018 shall be prohibited from lobbying 
before the Legislature and any statewide elected official, for 12 years after leaving office. 
(fg) The Legislature shall enact new laws, and strengthen the enforcement of existing laws, prohibiting 
Members of the Legislature from engaging in activities or having interests which conflict with the proper 
discharge of their duties and responsibilities. However, the people reserve to themselves the power to 
implement this requirement pursuant to Article II. 

Section 6.5 Section 7(c)(l)(A) is amended to read: 
SEC. 7 ( c) (I) The proceedings of each house and the committees thereof shall be open and public. However, 
closed sessions may be held solely for any of the following purposes: 

(A) To consider the appointment, employment, evaluation of performance, or dismissal of a public officer or 

employee, to consider or hear complaints or charges brought against a Member of the Legislature or other 
public officer or employee, or to establish the classification or compensation of an employee of the 
Legislature. 

Section 6.6 Section lO(c) is amended to read: 
SEC. 10. (c) Aey-bill introduced during the first year of the biennium of the legislative session that has not 
been passed by the house of origin by Janl:laFY-31  of the second calendar year of the--bien."lium may 
no longer be acted on by~No  bill may be passed by either house on or after SeptemberOctober 1 of 
an even-numbered year except statutes calling elections, statutes providing for tax levies or appropriations for 
the usual current expenses of the State, and urgency statutes, and bills passed after being vetoed by the 
Governor. 

15-0125 

Section 6.7 Section 15 is amended to read: 
SEC. 15.  A person who seeks to influence the vote or action of a member of the Legislature in the member's 
legislative capacity by bribery, promise of reward, intimidation, sexual acts, or other dishonest means, directly 
or indirectly, or a member of the Legislature so influenced, is guilty of a felony. 

Section 6.8 Section 18 (c) is added to read: 
SEC.  18 (c) (1) Members of the Legislature shall be temporality and immediately. suspended from office, 
without pay, when they are indicted for any felony. A member suspended pursuant to this paragraph shall not 
exercise any of the rights, privileges, duties, or power of his or her office, or utilize any resources of the 
Legislature, during the period the suspension is in effect. (2) Any Legislator that is convicted at trial or pleads 
guilty to a felony shall be immediately and 12ermanently removed from office. 

SECTION 7.  Addition of Article XXII of the California Constitution. 

Article 22 of the California Constitution is added to read: 
SEC.1 
(a) The people of California have the right to an honest Legislature. The people of California acknowledge that 
currently lie detector devices are not perfect and some results may be inconclusive. 
(b) The people of California require that every candidate for the Legislature and every current Legislator must 
prove their honesty and their character to the people of California. 
(c) All candidates for the Legislature do so voluntarily and agree to give up any privacy rights they may 
otherwise have, when those_rights concern issues that may influence any actions they would take as a 
,Legislator. This includes all questions candidates .and Legislators must answer that are listed in this Article. 
(d) No person has any right to hold elected Legislative office. The only rights are those under the state 
· constitution. This constitution specifically states that holding legislative office is a privilege and voluntary and 
is not a right.  Persons that hold legislative office must do so under the terms and conditions in this constitution 
and their only alternative to those conditions is to resign. 
(e) The people of the State of California hereby establish the Honest Legislator Program (HLP), which shall be 
run by the California Fair Political Practices Commission (FPPC). The FPPC shall implement regulations for 
theHLP. 

SEC.2 
(a) Any issues with Honest Legislator Program shall go directly to the California Supreme Court. 
(b) The Fair Political Practices Commission shall contract for sufficient approved lie detector operators and 
equipment to crn out the requirements of this Article. 
(c) The FPPC shall review and approve the lie detector operators and lie detector eguipment for HLP and shall 
annually review new technology for this program. 

SEC.3 
(a) All candidates for the Legislature must take a lie detector test when they sign up to run for the Legislature, 
or by the deadline to register to run. Each candidate will be asked two questions: 
(1) Have you lived within the boundaries of the Legislative District that you are running in and was it always 
used as your sole main residence for at least 365 days prior to the final filing date for this office? 
_G)  Was all information provided on your nomination forms to run for this office, complete and accurate? 
(b) The FPPC may grant extensions in areas where there is a shortage of approved lie detector operators to 
administer the lie detector tests, or in rural areas where candidates may have to travel long distances to find a 
qualified lie detector operator. 
(c) If the test results are inconclusive, the FPPC may require the candidate to take the test again. If the test 
results indicate that the candidate is lying, then the candidate may, at their own expense, take the test again 
with a different lie detector operator. Both sets ofresults must be included in any and all FPPC reports all of 
which shall be released to the public. 

15-0125 

(d) The FPPC shall investigate the residence and/or information supplied in the candidates nomination forms 
for every candidate that fails the test. The FPPC may also investigate candidates with inconclusive results. 
After investigating.!_he candidate, The FPPC, by a two thirds vote, shall recommend to the California Supreme 
Court the disqualification of Legislative candidates that it determines did not meet the qualifications for office 
or provided false information in their nomination papers. The Supreme Court shall vote on each 
recommendation within 30 days and a majority vote is needed to disqualify any candidate, 

SEC.4 
(a) All current members of the Legislature must take a lie detector test between October first and December 
first, inclusive, in every odd-numbered year. 
(b) Each Legislator will be asked the following questions: 
(1) Has any person sought to influence your vote or action in your legislative capacity by bribery, promise of 
reward, intimidation, gift of anything of value including campaign donations or non-monetary assistance, or 
other dishonest means during the past two years? 
(2) Have you committed any felonies during the past two years? 
(3) Have you faithfully upheld the constitution of the State of California and your oath of office during the last 
two years? 
( 4) Have you been under the influence of any drugs, legal or illegal, including alcohol narcotics, opiates or 
other drugs that effect your ability to think clearly, while you have conducted Legislative business, were in the 
capitol building, or while driving a motor vehicle, at any time during the past two years? 
Have you been under the influence of any drugs, including alcohol or narcotic drugs, at any time while you 
have conducted any Legislative business or driven any motor vehicle, during the last two years? 
(5) Have you or any of your campaign staff violated any campaign or financial disclosure laws during the past 
two years? 
( 6) Even if not married, did you have sex with any other Legislator or legislative staff member or lobbyist, 
during the last two years, excluding your spouse? 
(7) If you are married, did you have sex with any person other than your spouse during the last two years? 

SEC.5 
(a) All Lie detector results will be sent to the FPPC as soon as possible and the FPPC will make all results 
public . 
.(Q) Any Legislator, at their own ex12ense, may retake the lie detector test with a different approved lie detector 
operator, and all such results must be included in all results published by the FPPC. 
(c) If any results indicate that the Legislator may have violated the constitution or state law. then the FPPC 
shall investigate the issue and by a two thirds vote may require the Legislator to take additional lie detector 
tests. 
@After investigation, the FPPC shall, by a majority vote, send each of the following types of cases to the 
California Supreme Court: Violations of Article IV, Section 6.1  Section 2(c); (2) violations of Article IV, 
Section 6.3 Section 4(a); (3) Violations of Article IV, Section 6.7 Section 15;  (4) Article XXII, Section 4 or 
(5) Felony violations of State law, which by a vote of at least five Supreme Court Justices, may temporarily 
suspend the Legislator from office if the Supreme Court :finds that the plurality of evidence sustains any of the 
alleged violations in this section. 
( e) The Legislature and Governor shall fully fund The Honest Legislator Program and the FPPC may take any 
funding disputes directly to the California Supreme Court which has the authority to change funding amounts 
for this program. 
(f) It is a felony to attempt to influence or change the results of any lie detector results under the HLP. 

SEC. 6 Legislators may not seek or discuss employment with any company or individual that has ever directly 
or indirectly lobbied the Legislature during the previous 24 months, until after the general election in which the 
Legislator has been replaced. 

SEC. 7 
(1) Article 22, Section 4, shall be effective for all Legislators elected to office after November 7, 2018. 

15-0125 

(2) Any Legislator that refuses to comply with Article 22 must resign from the Legislature. The people of 
California are not providing any other alternatives. 

SECTION 8. GENERAL PROVISIONS. 

(a) If any provision of this measure or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and 
effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure are severable. 
(b) This measure is intended to be comprehensive. It is the intent of the People that in the event this 
measure or measures relating to the same subject shall appear on the same statewide election ballot, 
the provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this measure. 
In the event that this measure receives a greater number of affirmative votes, the provisions of this 
measure shall prevail in their entirety, and all provisions of the other measure or measures shall be 
null and void. 
( c) If a different Article XX.II is required in a different measure that passes at the same time or prior 
to this measure, then a different Article number shall be assigned for that portion of this measure. 

