1 5  - o 1  1  5  Amat.# I 

REMCHO, JOHANSEN & PURCELL, LLP 

ATTORNEYS AT LAW 

20 I DOLORES A VENUE 
SAN LEANDRO, CA  94577 
PHONE: (510) 346-6200 
FAX: (510) 346-6201 
EMAIL: kgetman@rjp.com 
WEBSITE: www.rjp.com 

SACRAMENTO PHONE: (916) 264-1818 

Robin B. Johansen 
James C.  Harrison 
Thomas A.  Willis 
Karen Getman 
Margaret R.  Prinzing 
Andrew Harris W erbrock 
Harry A.  Berezin 
Juan Carlos Ibarra 
Joseph Remcho  (1944-2003) 
Kathleen J.  Purcell (Ret.) 

January 11, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I'' Street, 17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

RECEIVED 

JAN  11  2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 

Submission of Amendment to Statewide Initiative Measure -
The  California Children's Education and Health Care Protection 
Actof2016, No.  15-0115 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

As you know, I serve as counsel for the proponents of the proposed statewide 

initiative, "The California Children's Education and Health Care Protection Act of 2016."  The 
proponents of the proposed initiative are Lance H.  Olson, Thomas A.  Willis, and Dario J. 
Frommer.  On their behalf, I am enclosing the following documents: 

The amended text of"The California Children's Education and Health Care 
Protection Act of 2016"; 

•  A red-line version showing the changes made in the amended text; and 

Signed authorizations from each of the proponents for the submission of the 
amended text together with their requests that the Attorney General's Office 
prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended text. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries or correspondence relative to this proposed 

initiative to me at the address listed below: 

Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
January 11, 2016 
Page2 

Karen Getman 
Remcho, Johansen &  Purcell, LLP 
201  Dolores Avenue 
San Leandro, CA 94577 
Phone:  (510) 346-6200 
Fax:  (510) 346-6201 
E-mail: kgetman@rjp.com 

KG:NL 
Enclosures 
(00264962) 

Karen Getman 

January 11, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street, 17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA  95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Submission of Amendment to The California Children's Education and Health Care 
Protection Act of 2016, No.  15-0115,  and Request to Prepare Circulating Title and 
Summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 3, 2015, I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The 
California Children's Education and Health Care Protection Act of 2016" ("Initiative") and 
submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to 
section 10( d) of Article II of the California Constitution. 

Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ), I hereby submit timely amendments to 
the text of the Initiative.  As one of the proponents of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the 
amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably germane to the theme, 
purpose, and subject of the Initiative.  I request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title 
and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Enclosures 
(00264957) 

January 11, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA  95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Submission of Amendment to  The  California Children's Education and Health Care 
Protection Act of 2016,  No.  15-0115,  and Request to Prepare Circulating Title and 
Summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 3, 2015, I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The 
California Children's Education and Health Care Protection Act of 2016" ("Initiative") and 
submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to 
section 10( d) of Article II of the California Constitution. 

Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ),  I hereby submit timely amendments to 
the text of the Initiative.  As one of the proponents of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the 
amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably germane to the theme, 
purpose, and subject of the Initiative.  I request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title 
and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Sincerely, 

H~ 

Lance H.  Olson 

Enclosures 
(00264956) 

January 11, 2016 

VIA MESSENGER 

Office of the Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA  95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Submission of Amendment to  The  California Children's Education and Health  Care 
Protection Act of 2016,  No.  15-0115,  and Request to Prepare Circulating Title  and 
Summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On December 3,  2015, I submitted a proposed statewide initiative titled "The 
California Children's Education and Health Care Protection Act of 2016" ("Initiative") and 
submitted a request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to 
section 10( d)  of Article II of the California Constitution. 

Pursuant to Elections Code section 9002(b ),  I hereby submit timely amendments to 
the text of the Initiative.  As one of the proponents of the Initiative, I approve the submission of the 
amended text to the Initiative and I declare that the amendment is reasonably germane to the theme, 
purpose, and subject of the Initiative.  I request that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title 
and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Sincerely, 

Thomas A.  Willis 

Enclosures 
(00264959) 

1 5  - 0  1 1 5  Amat # 

Arndt. #1 

THE CALIFORNIA CHILDREN'S EDUCATION AND HEALTH CARE PROTECTION 
ACTOF2016 

SECTION 1.  Title. 

This measure shall be known and may be cited as "The California Children's Education and 
Health Care Protection Act of 2016." 

SECTION 2.  Findings. 

(a) During the recent recession, California cut more than $56 billion from education, health care 
and other critical state and local services.  These cuts resulted in thousands of teacher layoffs, 
increased school class sizes, higher college tuition fees,  and reduced essential services. 
Temporary tax increases passed by California voters in 2012 helped to partially offset some of 
the lost funding, but those taxes will begin to expire at the end of 2016, leading to more deficits 
and more school cuts. 

(b) Unless we act now to temporarily extend the current income tax rates on the wealthiest 
Californians, our public schools will soon face another devastating round of cuts due to lost 
revenue of billions of dollars a year.  Public school funding was cut to the bone during the 
recession.  Our schools and colleges are just starting to recover, and we should be trying to 
protect education funding instead of gutting it all over again.  We can let the temporary sales tax 
increase expire to help working families, but this is not the time to be giving the wealthiest 
people in California a tax cut that they don't need and that our schools can't afford. 

( c) California's future depends on the success of its 9 million children. Every California child 
deserves a fair chance to become a successful adult.  But for children to succeed as adults, they 
must have access to high quality education and health care. 

( d) For children, education and health care are essential and dependent on one another. Access to 
a quality education is fundamental to the success of California's children. Even with adequate 
schools, children cannot obtain an education if illness prevents them from attending. And 
children growing up in communities without adequate health care are more likely to contract 
illnesses or have chronic medical conditions that prevent them from regularly attending school. 

( e) Underfunding of health care programs also harms California financially. Every new state 
dollar spent on health care for children and their families is automatically matched by federal 
funds.  This means every year California loses out on billions of dollars in federal matching 
money that could be used to ensure children and their families have access to healthcare. 

(f) Research also shows that early access to quality education and health care improves 
children's chances of succeeding in school and in life.  California should do more to ensure that 
the state's children receive the education and health care they need to thrive and achieve their 
highest potential. 

1 

Arndt. #1 

(g) California public schools, for example, are the most crowded in the nation. Class sizes are an 
astonishing 80 percent larger than the national average. The number of Californians training to 
be future teachers has dropped by 50 percent in the last five years as class sizes have soared. 

(h) As well, the budgets of California's community colleges were slashed during the Great 
Recession, diminishing the ability of California children - especially those from low-income 
families - to receive career training and an affordable and necessary college education. 

(i) California chronically underfunds health care.  California ranks 481h  out of the 50 states in 
health care spending, making it difficult for children and their families, seniors and the disabled 
to access health care. Underfunding health care for children leads to increased rates of serious 
illness, and higher long-term medical expenses.  Improved reimbursement for health services 
helps ensure that children have access to doctors and hospitals.  And once a hospital or doctor's 
office closes due to chronic underfunding, it closes for everyone in that community. 

(j) The California Children's Education and Health Care Protection Act of 2016 temporarily 
extends the higher income tax rates on couples earning more than half a million dollars a year -
those who can most afford it - to help all California children stay healthy, stay in good public 
schools, and have the opportunity for higher education. 

(k) This measure does not increase taxes on anyone earning under $250,000.  It does not extend 
the temporary sales tax increases that voters previously approved in 2012. 

(1)  The income tax revenue is guaranteed in the California Constitution to go directly to local 
school districts and community colleges, and to help the State pay for healthcare expenses for 
low income children and their families.  State funding is freed up to help balance the budget and 
prevent even more devastating cuts to  services for seniors, low-income children, working 
families and small business owners.  Everyone benefits. 

(m) To ensure all these funds go only where the voters intend, they are put in a special fund that 
the Legislature cannot divert to other purposes.  None of these revenues can be spent on state 
bureaucracy or administrative costs. 

(n) These funds will be subject to an independent audit every year to ensure they are spent only 
for the purposes set forth in this measure.  Elected officials will be subject to prosecution and 
criminal penalties if they misuse the funds. 

( o) California has seen massive budget swings over the past 15 years, with deep deficits and 
devastating cuts after the Dot-Com bust and the Great Recession. Maintaining the state's rainy 
day fund will stabilize the budget, avoid the boom and bust cycles of the past, and protect our 
children, seniors, and disabled Californians from cuts in school and healthcare funding during 
future economic downturns. 

2 

Amdt.#1 

SECTION 3.  Purpose and Intent. 

(a) The chief purpose and intent of the voters in enacting this measure is to avoid harmful cuts 
that would reduce the quality of education and instruction in California's local public schools, 
and to provide adequate funding for essential health care services for children and family 
members who are legal residents of California. 

(b) This measure is intended to protect our children by temporarily extending current income tax 
rates on wealthy Californians, instead of awarding a huge tax break to couples earning more than 
half a million dollars a year, or individuals earning more than a quarter million.  Instead of 
sending money back into the pockets of the wealthy, this measure sends the money to a special 
account that must be spent exclusively to ensure that every California child has access to a 
quality public education, and the quality health care necessary for them to stay in school and 
learn. 

( c) This measure is intended to keep California on its current track of balanced budgets and 
reliable funding for schools, community colleges and health care, preventing a return to the days 
of chronic budget deficits and funding cuts. 

( d) This measure guarantees in the Constitution that the revenues it raises for schools will be sent 
directly to school districts and community colleges for classroom expenses, not administrative 
costs.  This school funding cannot be suspended or withheld no matter what happens with the 
state budget. 

( e) This measure guarantees in the Constitution that the revenues it raises for health care will be 
spent to supplement existing state funding for healthcare services that qualify for  matching 
federal funds. 

(f) All revenues from this measure are subject to local audit every year, and audit by the 
independent Controller to ensure that they will be used only for the purposes set forth in this 
measure. 

SECTION 4.  Section 36 of Article XIII of the California Constitution is amended, to read: 

Sec. 36. 

(a) For purposes of this section: 

(1) "Public Safety Services" includes the following: 

(A) Employing and training public safety officials, including law enforcement personnel, 
attorneys assigned to criminal proceedings, and court security staff. 

(B) Managing local jails and providing housing, treatment, and services for, and supervision of, 
juvenile and adult offenders. 

3 

Arndt. #1 

(C) Preventing child abuse, neglect, or exploitation; providing services to children and youth 
who are abused, neglected, or exploited, or who are at risk of abuse, neglect, or exploitation, and 
the families of those children; providing adoption services; and providing adult protective 
services. 

(D) Providing mental health services to children and adults to reduce failure in school, harm to 
self or others, homelessness, and preventable incarceration or institutionalization. 

(E) Preventing, treating, and providing recovery services for substance abuse. 

(2) "2011 Realignment Legislation" means legislation enacted on or before September 30, 2012, 
to implement the state budget plan, that is entitled 2011  Realignment and provides for the 
assignment of Public Safety Services responsibilities to local agencies, including related 
reporting responsibilities.  The legislation shall provide local agencies with maximum flexibility 
and control over the design, administration, and delivery of Public Safety Services consistent 
with federal law and funding requirements, as detennined by the Legislature.  However, 2011 
Realignment Legislation shall include no new programs assigned to local agencies after 
January 1, 2012, except for the early periodic screening, diagnosis, and treatment (EPSDT) 
program and mental health managed care. 

(b)(l) Except as provided in subdivision (d), commencing in the 2011-12 fiscal year and 
continuing thereafter, the following amounts shall be deposited into the Local Revenue Fund 
2011, as established by Section 30025 of the Government Code, as follows: 

(A) All revenues, less refunds, derived from the taxes described in Sections 6051.15 and 6201.15 
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as those sections read on July 1, 2011. 

(B) All revenues, less refunds, derived from the vehicle license fees  described in Section 11005 
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as that section read on July 1, 2011. 

(2) On and after July 1, 2011, the revenues deposited pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not be 
considered General Fund revenues or proceeds of taxes for purposes of Section 8 of Article XVI 
of the California Constitution. 

(c)(l) Funds deposited in the Local Revenue Fund 2011  are continuously appropriated 
exclusively to fund the provision of Public Safety Services by local agencies.  Pending full 
implementation of the 2011  Realignment Legislation, funds may also be used to reimburse the 
State for program costs incurred in providing Public Safety Services on behalf of local agencies. 
The methodology for allocating funds shall be as specified in the 2011  Realignment Legislation. 

(2) The county treasurer, city and county treasurer, or other appropriate official shall create a 
County Local Revenue Fund 2011  within the treasury of each county or city and county.  The 
money in each County Local Revenue Fund 2011  shall be exclusively used to fund the provision 
of Public Safety Services by local agencies as specified by the 2011  Realignment Legislation. 

4 

Amdt.#1 

(3) Notwithstanding Section 6 of Article XIII B, or any other constitutional provision, a mandate 
of a new program or higher level of service on a local agency imposed by the 2011 Realignment 
Legislation, or by any regulation adopted or any executive order or administrative directive 
issued to implement that legislation, shall not constitute a mandate requiring the State to provide 
a subvention of funds within the meaning of that section.  Any requirement that a local agency 
comply with Chapter 9 ( commencing with Section 54950) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of 
the Government Code, with respect to performing its Public Safety Services responsibilities, or 
any other matter, shall not be a reimbursable mandate under Section 6 of Article XIII B. 

(4)(A) Legislation enacted after September 30, 2012, that has an overall effect of increasing the 
costs already borne by a local agency for programs or levels of service mandated by the 
2011  Realignment Legislation shall apply to local agencies only to the extent that the State 
provides annual funding for the cost increase.  Local agencies shall not be obligated to provide 
programs or levels of service required by legislation, described in this subparagraph, above the 
level for which funding has been provided. 

(B) Regulations, executive orders, or administrative directives, implemented after October 9, 
2011, that are not necessary to implement the 2011  Realignment Legislation, and that have an 
overall effect of increasing the costs already borne by a local agency for programs or levels of 
service mandated by the 2011  Realignment Legislation, shall apply to local agencies only to the 
extent that the State provides annual funding for the cost increase.  Local agencies shall not be 
obligated to provide programs or levels of service pursuant to new regulations, executive orders, 
or administrative directives, described in this subparagraph, above the level for which funding 
has been provided. 

(C) Any new program or higher level of service provided by local agencies, as described in 
subparagraphs (A) and (B), above the level for which funding has been provided, shall not 
require a subvention of funds by the State nor otherwise be subject to Section 6 of Article XIII B. 
This paragraph shall not apply to legislation currently exempt from subvention under 
paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 6 of Article XIII Bas that paragraph read on 
January 2, 2011. 

(D) The State shall not submit to the federal government any plans or waivers, or amendments to 
those plans or waivers, that have an overall effect of increasing the cost borne by a local agency 
for programs or levels of service mandated by the 2011  Realignment Legislation, except to the 
extent that the plans, waivers, or amendments are required by federal law, or the State provides 
annual funding for the cost increase. 

(E) The State shall not be required to provide a subvention of funds pursuant to this paragraph 
for a mandate that is imposed by the State at the request of a local agency or to comply with 
federal law.  State funds required by this paragraph shall be from a source other than those 
described in subdivisions (b) and ( d), ad valorem property taxes, or the Social Services 
Subaccount of the Sales Tax Account of the Local Revenue Fund. 

5 

Amdt.#1 

(5)(A) For programs described in subparagraphs (C) to (E), inclusive, of paragraph (1) of 
subdivision (a) and included in the 2011  Realignment Legislation, ifthere are subsequent 
changes in federal statutes or regulations that alter the conditions under which federal matching 
funds as described in the 2011 Realignment Legislation are obtained, and have the overall effect 
of increasing the costs incurred by a local agency, the State shall annually provide at least 
50 percent of the nonfederal share of those costs as determined by the State. 

(B) When the State is a party to any complaint brought in a federal judicial or administrative 
proceeding that involves one or more of the programs described in subparagraphs (C) to (E), 
inclusive, of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) and included in the 2011  Realignment Legislation, 
and there is a settlement or judicial or administrative order that imposes a cost in the form of a 
monetary penalty or has the overall effect of increasing the costs already borne by a local agency 
for programs or levels of service mandated by the 2011  Realignment Legislation, the State shall 
annually provide at least 50 percent of the nonfederal share of those costs as determined by the 
State.  Payment by the State is not required if the State determines that the settlement or order 
relates to one or more local agencies failing to perform a ministerial duty, failing to perform a 
legal obligation in good faith, or acting in a negligent or reckless manner. 

(C) The state funds provided in this paragraph shall be from funding sources other than those 
described in subdivisions (b) and ( d), ad valorem property taxes, or the Social Services 
Subaccount of the Sales Tax Account of the Local Revenue Fund. 

( 6) If the State or a local agency fails to perform a duty or obligation under this section or under 
the 2011 Realignment Legislation, an appropriate party may seek judicial relief.  These 
proceedings shall have priority over all other civil matters. 

(7) The funds deposited into a County Local Revenue Fund 2011  shall be spent in a manner 
designed to maintain the State's eligibility for federal matching funds,  and to ensure compliance 
by the State with applicable federal standards governing the State's provision of Public Safety 
Services. 

(8) The funds deposited into a County Local Revenue Fund 2011  shall not be used by local 
agencies to supplant other funding for Public Safety Services. 

( d) If the taxes described in subdivision (b) are reduced or cease to be operative, the State shall 
annually provide moneys to the Local Revenue Fund 2011  in an amount equal to or greater than 
the aggregate amount that otherwise would have been provided by the taxes described in 
subdivision (b).  The method for determining that amount shall be described in the 2011 
Realignment Legislation, and the State shall be obligated to provide that amount for so long as 
the local agencies are required to perform the Public Safety Services responsibilities assigned by 
the 2011 Realignment Legislation.  If the State fails to annually appropriate that amount, the 
Controller shall transfer that amount from the General Fund in pro rata monthly shares to the 
Local Revenue Fund 2011.  Thereafter, the Controller shall disburse these amounts to local 
agencies in the manner directed by the 2011  Realignment Legislation.  The state obligations 
under this subdivision shall have a lower priority claim to General Fund money than the first 

6 

Amdt.#1 

priority for money to be set apart under Section 8 of Article XVI and the second priority to pay 
voter-approved debts and liabilities described in Section 1 of Article XVI. 

( e )(1) To ensure that public education is not harmed in the process of providing critical 
protection to local Public Safety Services, the Education Protection Account is hereby created in 
the General Fund to receive and disburse the revenues derived from the incremental increases in 
taxes imposed by this section, as specified in subdivision (f). 

(2)(A) Before June 30, 2013, and before June 30 of each year from 2014 to W-l-&2030,  inclusive, 
the Director of Finance shall estimate the total amount of additional revenues, less refimds, that 
will be derived from the incremental increases in tax rates made in subdivision (f) that will be 
available for transfer into the Education Protection Account during the next fiscal year.  The 
Director of Finance shall make the same estimate by January 10, 2013, for additional revenues, 
less refunds, that will be received by the end of the 2012-13 fiscal year. 

(B) During the last 10 days of the quarter of each of the first three quarters of each fiscal year 
from 2013-14 to 2018  192030-31, inclusive, the Controller shall transfer into the Education 
Protection Account one-fourth of the total amount estimated pursuant to subparagraph (A) for 
that fiscal year, except as this amount may be adjusted pursuant to subparagraph (D). 

(C) In each of the fiscal years from 2012-13 to 2020 212032-33, inclusive, the Director of 
Finance shall calculate an adjustment to the Education Protection Account, as specified by 
subparagraph (D), by adding together the following amounts, as applicable: 

(i) In the last quarter of each fiscal year from 2012-13 to 2018  192030-31, inclusive, the Director 
of Finance shall recalculate the estimate made for the fiscal year pursuant to subparagraph (A), 
and shall subtract from this updated estimate the amounts previously transferred to the Education 
Protection Account for that fiscal year. 

(ii) In June 2015 and in every June from 2016 to ~2033, inclusive, the Director of Finance 
shall make a final determination of the amount of additional revenues, less refunds, derived from 
the incremental increases in tax rates made in subdivision (f) for the fiscal year ending two years 
prior.  The amount of the updated estimate calculated in clause (i) for the fiscal year ending two 
years prior shall be subtracted from the amount of this final determination. 

(D) If the sum determined pursuant to subparagraph (C) is positive, the Controller shall transfer 
an amount equal to that sum into the Education Protection Account within 10 days preceding the 
end of the fiscal year.  If that amount is negative, the Controller shall suspend or reduce 
subsequent quarterly transfers, if any, to the Education Protection Account until the total 
reduction equals the negative amount herein described.  For purposes of any calculation made 
pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph (C), the amount of a quarterly transfer shall not be 
modified to reflect any suspension or reduction made pursuant to this subparagraph. 

(E) Before June 30. 2018. and before June 30 of each year from 2019 to 2030. inclusive. the 
Director of Finance shall estimate the amount of the additional revenues. less refunds. to be 

7 

Arndt. #1 

derived in the following fiscal year from the incremental increases in tax rates made in 
subdivision (:0, that, when combined with all other available General Fund revenues, will be 
required to meet: 

(i) the minimum funding guarantee of section 8 of article XVI for that following fiscal year: and 

(ii) the workload budget for that following fiscal year. excluding any program expenditures 
already accounted for through (i).  For purposes of this section, ''workload budget" has the 
meaning set forth in Government Code section 13308.05. as that section read and was interpreted 
by the Department of Finance on January l, 2016. provided, however. that "currently authorized 
services" shall mean only those services that would have been considered "currently authorized 
services" under Government Code section 13308.05 as of January 1, 2016. 

(F) In order to enhance the ability of all California school children and their families to receive 
regular. quality healthcare and thereby minimize school absenteeism due to health-related 
problems. whenever the Director of Finance estimates that the amount available for transfer into 
the Education Protection Account during the following fiscal year exceeds the amount of 
revenues required from that Account pursuant to subparagraph (E) for that following fiscal year. 
the Director shall identify the remaining amount. Fifty percent of that remainder. up to a 
maximum of two billion dollars in any single fiscal year. shall be allocated by the Controller 
from the Education Protection Account to the California Department of Health Care Services on 
a quarterly basis to increase funding for the existing healthcare programs and services described 
in Chapter 7 (commencing with Section 14000) to Chapter 8.9 (commencing with Section 
14700). inclusive. of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.  The funding 
shall be used only for critical. emergency, acute and preventive healthcare services to children 
and their families, provided by health care professionals and health facilities that are licensed 
pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1250. and to health plans or others that manage the 
provision of healthcare for Medi-Cal beneficiaries that are contracting with the California 
Department of Health Care Services to provide health benefits pursuant to this section. 

(G) The allocation provided for in subparagraph (F) may be suspended by statute during a fiscal 
year in which a budget emergency has been declared. provided, however. that the allocation shall 
not be reduced beyond the proportional reduction in overall General Fund expenditures for that 
year.  For purposes of this section. "budget emergency" has the same meaning as in paragraph 
(2) of subdivision (b) of section 22 of article XVI. 

(H) The funding provided pursuant to subparagraph (F) shall not be used to supplant existing 
state general funds for the nonfederal share of payments for those programs and, consistent with 
federal law. shall be used to obtain federal matching Medicaid funds. 

(3) All moneys in the Education Protection Account are hereby continuously appropriated for the 
support of school districts, county offices of education, charter schools, and community college 
districts as set forth in this paragraph. and for healthcare as set forth in subparagraph (F) of 
paragraph (2). 

8 

Arndt. #1 

(A) Eleven percent of the moneys appropriated for education pursuant to this paragraph shall be 
allocated quarterly by the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges to 
community college districts to provide general purpose funding to community college districts in 
proportion to the amounts determined pursuant to Section 84750.5 of the Education Code, as that 
code section read upon voter approval of this section, on November 6, 2012.  The allocations 
calculated pursuant to this subparagraph shall be offset by the amounts specified in 
subdivisions (a), (c),  and (d) of Section 84751  of the Education Code, as that section read upoo 
voter approval of this section on November 6, 2012, that are in excess of the amounts calculated 
pursuant to Section 84750.5 of the Education Code, as that section read 1:ipon voter approval of 
this section on November 6, 2012, provided that no community college district shall receive less 
than one hundred dollars ($100) per full time equivalent student. 

(B) Eighty-nine percent of the moneys appropriated for education pursuant to this paragraph 
shall be allocated quarterly by the Superintendent of Public Instruction to provide general 
purpose funding to school districts, county offices of education, and state general-purpose 
funding to charter schools in proportion to the revenue limits calculated pursuant to 
Sections 2558 and 42238 of the Education Code and the amounts calculated pursuant to 
Section 47633 of the Education Code for county offices of education, school districts, and 
charter schools, respectively, as those sections read upon voter approval of this section on 
November 6, 2012.  The amounts so calculated shall be offset by the amounts specified in 
subdivision (c) of Section 2558 of, paragraphs (1) through (7) of subdivision (h) of 
Section 42238 of, and Section 47635 of, the Education Code for county offices of education, 
school districts, and charter schools, respectively, as those sections read upon voter approval of 
this section on November 6,  2012, that are in excess of the amounts calculated pursuant to 
Sections 2558, 42238, and 47633 of the Education Code for county offices of education, school 
districts, and charter schools, respectively, as those sections read upon voter approval of this 
section on November 6, 2012, provided that no school district, county office of education, or 
charter school shall receive less than two hundred dollars ($200) per unit of average daily 
attendance. 

(4) This subdivision is self-executing and requires no legislative action to take effect. 
Distribution of the moneys in the Education Protection Account by the Board of Governors of 
the California Community Colleges and Superintendent of Public Instruction shall not be delayed 
or otherwise affected by failure of the Legislature and Governor to enact an annual budget bill 
pursuant to Section 12 of Article N, by invocation of paragraph (h) of Section 8 of Article XVI, 
or by any other action or failure to act by the Legislature or Governor. 

(5) Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, the moneys deposited in the Education 
Protection Account for education shall not be used to pay any costs incurred by the Legislature, 
the Governor, or any agency of state government. 

(6) A community college district, county office of education, school district, or charter school 
shall have sole authority to determine how the moneys received from the Education Protection 
Account are spent in the school or schools within its jurisdiction, provided, however, that the 
appropriate governing board or body shall make these spending determinations in open session 

9 

Amdt.#1 

of a public meeting of the governing board or body and shall not use any of the funds from the 
Education Protection Account for salaries or benefits of administrators or any other 
administrative costs.  Each community college district, county office of education, school 
district, and charter school shall annually publish on its Internet Web site an accounting of how 
much money was received from the Education Protection Account and how that money was 
spent. 

(7) The annual independent financial and compliance audit required of community college 
districts, county offices of education, school districts, and charter schools shall, in addition to all 
other requirements of law, ascertain and verify whether the funds provided from the Education 
Protection Account have been properly disbursed and expended as required by this section. 
Expenses incurred by those entities to comply with the additional audit requirement of this 
section may be paid with funding from the Education Protection Account and shall not be 
considered administrative costs for purposes of this section. 

(8) Revenues, less refunds, derived pursuant to subdivision (f) for deposit in the Education 
Protection Account pursuant to this section shall be deemed "General Fund revenues," "General 
Fund proceeds of taxes," and "moneys to be applied by the State for the support of school 
districts and community college districts" for purposes of Section 8 of Article XVI. 

(f)(l)(A) In addition to the taxes imposed by Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of 
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, for the privilege of selling tangible personal 
property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers at the rate of 1/4 percent of the gross 
receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this State on 
and after January 1, 2013, and before January 1, 2017. 

(B) In addition to the taxes imposed by Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of 
the Revenue and Taxation Code, an excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other 
consumption in this State of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after 
January 1, 2013, and before January 1, 2017, for storage, use, or other consumption in this state 
at the rate of 1/4 percent of the sales price of the property. 

(C) The Sales and Use Tax Law, including any amendments enacted on or after the effective date 
of this section, shall apply to the taxes imposed pursuant to this paragraph. 

(D) This paragraph shall become inoperative on January 1, 2017. 

(2) For any taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2012, and before January 1, ~2031, 
with respect to the tax imposed pursuant to Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, 
the income tax bracket and the rate of9.3 percent set forth in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of 
Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be modified by each of the following: 

(A)(i) For that portion of taxable income that is over two hundred fifty thousand dollars 
($250,000) but not over three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000), the tax rate is  10.3 percent of 
the excess over two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). 

10 

Amdt.#1 

(ii) For that portion of taxable income that is over three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) but 
not over five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the tax rate is  11.3 percent of the excess over 
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000). 

(iii) For that portion of taxable income that is over five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the 
tax rate is  12.3 percent of the excess over five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). 

(B) The income tax brackets specified in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) of subparagraph (A) shall be 
recomputed, as otherwise provided in subdivision (h) of Section 17041 of the Revenue and 
Taxation Code, only for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2013. 

(C)(i) For purposes of subdivision (g) of Section 19136 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, this 
paragraph shall be considered to be chaptered on tae date it aeeomes effective November 6, 
2012. 

(ii) For purposes of Part 10 (commencing with Section 17001) of, and Part 10.2 (commencing 
with Section 18401) of, Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the modified tax brackets 
and tax rates established and imposed by this paragraph shall be deemed to be established and 
imposed under Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

(D) This paragraph shall become inoperative on December 1, :2,0!92031. 

(3) For any taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2012, and before January 1, :2m:-92031, 
with respect to the tax imposed pursuant to Section 17041 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, 
the income tax bracket and the rate of9.3 percent set forth in paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of 
Section 17041  of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall be modified by each of the following: 

(A)(i) For that portion of taxable income that is over three hundred forty thousand dollars 
($340,000) but not over four hundred eight thousand dollars ($408,000), the tax rate is 
10.3 percent of the excess over three hundred forty thousand dollars ($340,000). 

(ii) For that portion of taxable income that is over four hundred eight thousand dollars 
($408,000) but not over six hundred eighty thousand dollars ($680,000), the tax rate is 
11.3 percent of the excess over four hundred eight thousand dollars ($408,000). 

(iii) For that portion of taxable income that is over six hundred eighty thousand dollars 
($680,000), the tax rate is  12.3 percent of the excess over six hundred eighty thousand dollars 
($680,000). 

(B) The income tax brackets specified in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii) of subparagraph (A) shall be 
recomputed, as otherwise provided in subdivision (h) of Section 17041  of the Revenue and 
Taxation Code, only for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2013. 

11 

Amdt.#1 

(C)(i) For purposes of subdivision (g) of Section 19136 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, this 
paragraph shall be considered to be chaptered on the date it becomes effeetiv=e November 6, 
2012. 

(ii) For purposes of Part 10 (commencing with Section 17001) of, and Part 10.2 (commencing 
with Section 18401) of, Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the modified tax brackets 
and tax rates established and imposed by this paragraph shall be deemed to be established and 
imposed under Section 17041  of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 

(D) This paragraph shall become inoperative on December 1, ~2031. 

(g)(l) The Controller, pursuant to his or her statutory authority, may perform audits of 
expenditures from the Local Revenue Fund 2011  and any County Local Revenue Fund 2011, and 
shall audit the Education Protection Account to ensure that those funds are used and accounted 
for in a manner consistent with this section. 

(2) The Attorney General or local district attorney shall expeditiously investigate, and may seek 
civil or criminal penalties for,  any misuse of moneys from the County Local Revenue Fund 2011 
or the Education Protection Account. 

SECTION 5.  Conflicting Measures. 

In the event that this measure and another measure that affects the tax rates for personal income 
shall appear on the same statewide ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall 
be deemed to be in conflict with this measure.  In the event that this measure receives a greater 
number of affirmative votes than a measure deemed to be in conflict with it, the provisions of 
this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the other measure or measures shall be null and 
void. 

SECTION 6.  Severability. 

If the provisions of this act, or part thereof, are for any reason held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and 
effect and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. 

SECTION 7.  Proponent Standing. 

Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the State, government agency, or any of its 
officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this act, following its approval by the voters, any 
other government employer, the proponent, or in his or her absence, any citizen of this State shall 
have the authority to intervene in any court action challenging the constitutionality of this act for 
the purpose of defending its constitutionality, whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, and 
on discretionary review by the Supreme Court of California and/or the Supreme Court of the 
United States.  The fees and costs of defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated 
to the Attorney General, which shall be satisfied promptly. 

12 

SECTION 8.  Effective Date. 

This measure shall take effect immediately upon passage. 

Arndt. #1 

13 

