Date: December 7, 2015 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
1300 I Street, 1 ih Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

, 

1 5  - '0  1  1 4  Amdt#  J 

~CEIVEo 

DEC  O 7 2015 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: The Public Education Restoration Act of 2016 

As a proponent of the "Public Education Restoration Act of 2016 (15-0114)", I am 
amending our initiative. Our amendment deletes (italicized and lined out) part of the 
language in Article II, section (a) and adds the deleted language to an earlier part of 
Article II, section (a) (bold and underlined). Our amendment also deletes language in 
Article II, section (b) (italicized and lined out). I have enclosed an amended copy of 
our initiative with the language to be deleted italicized and lined out an1 the added 
language bold and underlined. 

Thank you for your attention in processing this request, 

Diana Mansker 

ticuw~ 

Proponent 

Please direct all correspondence and inquiries to: 

Repeal Charter School Laws Committee 
Attention: Diana Mansker 
7753 Laurie Way 
Sacramento, CA 95832 
916-391-3384 

;r 

15-0114 

12/03/15 08:28 AM 
RN  15 22884 PAGE 1 

Arndt.# I 

SECTION  1. This act shall be known, and  may be cited, as the Public School 

Restoration Act of 2016. 

SEC. 2.  (a) The people of California find and declare all of the following: 

( 1 ) The charter school movement has become a major tool for the corporate 

takeover of California public schools. Charter schools have harmed communities, 

parents, and educators by weakening the fair funding of California's public education 

system. Charter schools have also severely weakened democratic policymaking, as 

charter schools have nonelected, private governing boards that are unaccountable to 

the taxpayers. Charter schools are exempt from most laws governing public schools 

and  school districts. Charter school investors see our public schools as profitable 

business opportunities, and view our children's eaucationsascommoait1estooe sola~--~---

at a profit. 

(2) Charter schools often reject pupils with  low test scores, pupils with behavior 

issues, pupils with special needs, and  pupils who are  English language learners. Too 

often, charter schools falsify records,  commit enrollment fraud, embezzle public funds, 

and allow unlicensed instructors to teach in  low-income areas. All of these practices 

have led to the segregation of pupil populations. Over the last 23 years,  charter 

schools received  a huge amount of public funds, yet have had  no effective public 

accountability.  Charter schools also commit union busting tactics, such as prohibiting 

workers from bargaining collectively, shattering communities by closing down schools 

in  predo.'minantly low-income areas, unjustly firing credentialed teachers, and draining 

public funds from the entire public education budget. 

12/03/15 08:28 AM 
RN  15 22884 PAGE 2 

(3) The billionaires funding  EdVoice, the California Charter School Association, 

and  Democrats for Education Reform are supporting candidates and  local programs 
that would dismantle the constitutional guarantee of a free public education for every 
pupil in  California and  replace it with company-run charter schools, noncredentialed 

teachers, and unproven, untested, so-called "reforms." 

(b) Therefore, it is the goal of this measure to accomplish all of the following through 

the elimination of charter schools and virtual  charter schools by the repeal of the 

Charter Schools Act of 1992: 

(1) To terminate the existence of all  charter schools in this state, whether those 

charter schools are located in conventional buildings or operate online.  Existing charter 

schools would either convert to a traaiiionaT ptiollc school,als-ol<nown as a common 

school, or close, depending on factors such as cost and  pupil enrollment, with those 

decisions to be made by local school districts.  If the decision is made to close a charter 

school, the pupils displaced by the termination of charter schools shall be appropriately 

and  promptly accommodated in  public schools. 

(2) To end the privatization and  segregation of our public schools caused by the 

charter school system,. and to support the real  needs of the classroom: trained 

teachers, adequate funding, safe and clean facilities, diverse and stimulating 

curriculum, and equal access to a high-quality public education administered by 

publicly elected school boards.  No public money shall ever be appropriated for the 

support of any school not under the exclusive control of the officers of the public 

schools, as required by Section 8 of Article IX of the California Constitution. 

12/03/15 08:28 AM 
RN  15 22884 PAGE 3 

(3) To ensure that free,  accessible public schools are able to offer to all  of their 

pupils a fair,  substantive opportunity to learn from educators who have the right to  be 

represented  by their unions and to bargain collectively. 

SEC. 3.  Section 91  is added to the Education Code, to read: 

91.  Pursuant to the repeal of the Charter Schools Act of 1992 (Part 26.  8 

(commencing with  Section 47600) of Division 4 of Title 2) and the elimination of charter 

schools effected  by the Public School Restoration Act of 2016, whenever the term 

"charter school" is used  in  a provision of this code, that provision shall be  interpreted in 

light of the expressed intent of the Public School Restoration Act of 2016 to eliminate 

charter schools in this state. 

SEC. 4. Article 11  (commencing with Section 33460) is added to Chapter 3 of 

- --Pan: 20 of D1v1s1on  z of Title 2 of tne Eaucat1on  Code,-toreaa:  - ---- --- --- - - -- ---- -

Article  11.  Restoration of Public Schools 

33460.  Upon the elimination of charter schools by Section 5 of the Public 

School  Restoration Act of 2016: 

(a) An  existing charter school maintaining a single site or multiple sites within 

one school district or with a site or sites  in  multiple school districts shall either 

convert to a common school under the exclusive control of the school district in which  it 

is  located or close depending on factors such as cost and  pupil enrollment, with that 

decision to  be  made by the school district in which the charter school  is located. An 

existing charter school with no  physical site or vlith a site or sites in multip!-e school 

districts shall close.  Upon closure of a charter school, all  pupils displaced by the 

12/03/15 08:28 AM 
RN  15 22884 PAGE 4 

termination of the charter school shall be appropriately and  promptly accommodated in 

public schools as determined by the pupil's resident school district. All  pupil records in 

the possession or control of charter schools shall be turned over to the appropriate 

local educational agency or the pupil's new school of attendance. 

(b) All  public funds that have been allocated to  charter schools that are 

unencumbered as of the operative date of the act that adds this article shall be 

returned to the state and deposited in  Part A of the State School Fund. Any real 

property that has been purchased with  public funds shall become property of a school 

district i~ which the real  property is  located based and allocated jn  the case of multiple 

school districts to the district with the greatest number of enro.'.'-ed charter school pupHs 

at the tlme of closure. Any furnishings, supplies,  instructional materials, or other 

purchased with public funds shall  be  proportionally allocated to the school districts in 

which the former charter school pupils reside. 

33461.  In order to implement Section 33460: 

(a) The Superintendent is authorized to request the Bureau of State Audits to 

conduct,.appropriate audits relating to the assets of charter schools. 

(b) The Attorney General and district attorneys are authorized to bring civil and 

criminal actions, as appropriate, in  courts of competent jurisdiction against parties who 

violate Section 33460. 

SEC. 5.  Section 33462 is added to the Education Code, to read: 

33462.  No charter school shall begin the closure procedures described in  its 

charter petition pursuant to subparagraph (P) of paragraph  ( 5) of subdivision (b) 

12/03/15 08:28 AM 
RN  15 22884 PAGE 5 

Section 47605 or otherwise transfer any assets or incur any liabilities in  any manner 

inconsistent with the day-to-day operations of the school. 

SEC. 6.  Part 26.8 (commencing with Section 47600) of Division 4 of Title 2 of 

the Education Code is repealed. 

$.EC.  7. With the exception of Section 5, this act shall  become operative on July 

1 of the year immediately following the year in which it is approved by the voters. 

Section 5 shall take effect immediately. 

- 0 -

