Rodrigo J.  Howard 

650-208-3 779 

rod.howard@capkeyadvisors.com 

December 22, 2016 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of-the Attorney General 
1300 I Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

16-0012 

RECEIVED 

DEC  2 8 2016 

fNTTIATIVE COORDINATOR 

xrroRNEYGENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 	

Initiative Proposal on the Election of the President and Vice President 
of the United States in a Manner Reflecting the National Popular Vote 

The undersigned hereby proposes and submits the initiative measure set forth below and 

requests that a circulating title and summary ofthe chief purpose and points of the proposed 
measure be prepared.  The complete text of the initiative measure is as follows: 

"Shall California's elected officials use all of their federal and state constitutional and 
legal authority to  cause the President and Vice President of the United States to be 
elected in a manner that follows (and, until then, more closely and more consistently 
follows) the outcome of the national popular vote for those offices, including, but not 
limited to, their authority to propose and ratify one or more amendments to the United 
. States Constitution to eliminate or modify the Electoral College process, their authority to 
approve and adopt interstate compacts such as the National Popular Vote Interstate 
Compact, and their authority to propose, adopt and pursue related legislation and 
litigation?" 

The undersigned further hereby certifies and states, in accordance with the provisions of 

Sections 9001  and 9608 of the California Elections Code, as follows: 

· 

"I,  Rodrigo J.  Howard, declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United 
States, 18 years of age or older, and a resident of the County of San Francisco, 
California." 

''I, Rodrigo J.  Howard, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 
18650 of the Elections Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an 
initiative petition to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the proposed 
measure for the ballot.  I certify that I will not knowingly or willfully allow the signatures 
for this initiative to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the measure for 
the ballot." 

For reference, the full text of the proposed initiative measure, and the foregoing certifications, 
are reproduced on the accompanying pages.  A check for the applicable fee of $2,000, made 
payable to the State of California, is also enclosed.  If you have any questions, please contact me 
by e-mail at the address above or by phone at the number above. 

~J.~ 


Rodrigo  J.  Howard 

FULL TEXT OF INITIATIVE PROPOSAL 


submitted on December 22, 2016 by Rodrigo J.  Howard 


16-0012 


"ShallCalifornia's el~cted officials use all of their federal and state constitutional and legal 
authority to  cause the President and Vice President of the United States to be elected in a manner 
that follows  (and, until then, more closely and more consistently follows) the outcome of the 
national popular vote for those offices, including, but not limited to, their authority to propose 
and ratify one or more amendments to the United States Constitution to eliminate or modify the 
Electoral College process, their authority to approve and adopt interstate compacts such as the 
National Popular Vote Interstate Compact, and their authority to propose, adopt and pursue 
related legislation and litigation?" 

