July 14, 2016 

VIA EXPRESS MAIL 

The Honorable Kamala  D.  Harris 
Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 17th Floor, P.O.  Box 944255 

Sacramento, CA 95814 


1  6  - 0  0  0  4 

RECEIVED 

JUL  1 5 2016 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Request for Title and Summary for Pr()posed Referendum (Assembly Bill  No. 1135) 

Dear Ms. Harris: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 9, of the California 'constitution, I hereby submit the attached proposed 
referendum (veto referendum) and  request a circulating title and summary for petitions to collect 
signatures from California voters.  I have attached the complete text of the bill, which is Assembly Bill 
No. 1135. 

I,  Barry Bahrami, declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United States, 18 years of 
age or older, and a resident of (insert county), California." (Elec. Code,§ 9001.) 

I,  Barry Bahrami, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 18650 of the Elections 
Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an initiative petition to be used for any purpose 
other than qualification of the proposed measure for the ballot. I certify that I will not knowingly or 
willfully allow the signatures for this initiative to be  used for any purpose other than qualification of the 
measure for the ballot." (Elec. Code, § 9608.) 

My mailing address for purposes of this referendum is: 

7668 El  Camino Real 
Suite 104-627 
Carlsbad, CA 92009 
Barry@VetoGunmageddon.org 

I have attached my personal registered voter address to letter. 

:~ 

Sincerely, 

~~ 

Barry Bahrami 
Proponent 
enclosures 

16-0004 


Assembly Bill No. 1135 

CHAPTER40 

An act to amend Sections 30515 and 30900 of, and to add Section 30680 to, the Penal Code, relating to fireanns. 

[ Approved by Governor  July O 1, 2016. Filed with Secretary of State  July O1, 2016. ] 

LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST 

AB  1135, Levine. Firearms: assault weapons. 

(1) Existing law generally prohibits the possession or transfer of assault weapons, except for the sale, purchase, importation, or 
possession of assault weapons by specified individuals, including law enforcement officers. Under existing law, "assault weapon" 
means, among other things, a semiautomatic centerfire rifle or a semiautomatic pistol that has the capacity to accept a detachable 
magazine and has any one of several specified attributes, including, for rifles, a thumbhole stock, and for pistols, a 2nd handgrip. 

This bill would revise this definition of·'assault weapon" to mean a semiautomatic centerfire rifle or a semiautomatic pistol that 
does not have a fixed magazine but has any one ofthose specified attributes. The bill would also define "fixed magazine" to 
mean an  ammunition feeding device contained in, or pe1manently attached to, a firearm in  such a manner that the device cannot 
be removed without disassembly of the firearm action. 

By expanding the definition of an  existing crime, the bill would impose a state-mandated local program. 

(2) Existing law requires that any person who, within this state, possesses an assault weapon, except as otherwise provided, be 
punished as a :felony or for a period not to exceed one year in  a county jail. 

This bill would exempt from punishment under that provision a person who possessed an assault weapon prior to January 1, 
2017, if specified requirements are met. 

(3) Existing law requires that, with specified exceptions, any person who, prior to January L 2001, lawfully possessed an assault 
weapon prior to the date it was defined as an assault weapon, and which was not specified as an assault weapon at the time of 
lawful possession, register the firearm with the Department of Justice. Existing law permits the Depaitment of Justice to charge a 
fee for registration ofup to $20 per person but not to exceed the actual processing costs ofthe department. Existing law, aller the 
department establishes fees sufticient to reimburse the department for processing costs, requires fees charged to increase at a rate 
not to  exceed the legislatively approved annual  cost-of-living adjustment for the depa11ment's budget or as otherwise increased 
through the Budget Act. Existing law requires those fees to be deposited into the Dealers' Record of Sale Special Account. 
Existing law, the Administrative Procedure Act, establishes the requirements for the adoption, publication, review, and 
implementation of regulations by state agencies. 

This bill would require that any person who, from JanuaI')'  1, 2001, to December 31, 2016, inclusive, lawfully possessed an 
assault weapon that does not have a fixed magazine, as defined, and including those weapons with an ammunition feeding device 
that can be removed readily from the firearm with the use of a tool, register the firearm with the Department of Justice before 
January  1, 2018, but not before the effective date of specified regulations. The bill would pennit the depaitment to increase the 
$20 registration fee as long as it does not exceed the reasonable processing costs of the depaitment. The bill would also require 
registrations to be submitted electronically via the Internet utilizing a public-facing application made available by the department. 
The bill would require the registration to contain specified information, including, but not limited to, a description of the fireai·m 
that identifies it uniquely and specified information about the registrant. The bill would pe1mit the department to charge a fee of 
up to $15 per person for registration through the Intemet, not to exceed the reasonable processing costs ofthe depaitment to be 
paid and deposited, as specified, for purposes ofthe registration program. The bill would require the department to adopt 
regulations for the purpose of implementing those provisions and would exempt those regulations from the Administrative 
Procedure Act. The bill would also make technical and confom1ing changes. 

(4) The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by 

the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement. 


This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason. 

DIGEST KEY 
Vote: MAJORITY  Appropriation: NO  Fiscal Committee: YES  Local Program: YES 

BILL TEXT 

THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS: 


SECTION 1. 
Section 30515 ofthe Penal Code is amended to read: 

30515. 
(a) Notwithstanding Section 30510, "assault weapon" also means any of the following: 

(1) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that does not have a fixed magazine but has any one ofthe following: 

(A) A pistol grip that protrndes conspicuously beneath the action ofthe weapon. 

(B) A thumbhole stock. 

(C) A folding or telescoping stock. 

(D) A grenade launcher or flare launcher. 

(E) A flash  suppressor. 

(F) A forward pistol grip. 

(2) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has a fixed magazine with the capacity to accept more than l Orounds. 

(3) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has an overall length ofless than 30 inches. 

(4) A semiautomatic pistol that does not have a fixed magazine but has any one of the following: 

(A) A threaded barrel, capable of accepting a flash suppressor, forward handgrip, or silencer. 

(B) A second handgrip. 

(C) A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles, the barrel that allows the bearer to fire the weapon without 
burning the bearer's hand, except a slide that encloses the barrel. 

(D) The capacity to accept a detachable magazine at some location outside of the pistol grip. 

(5) A semiautomatic pistol with a fixed magazine that has the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds. 

(6) A semiautomatic shotgun that has both ofthe following: 

(A) A folding or telescoping stock. 

(B) A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action ofthe weapon, thumbbole stock,  or vertical handgrip. 

(7) A semiautomatic shotgun that has the ability to accept a detachable magazine. 

(8) Any shotgun with a revolving cylinder. 

(b) For purposes of this section, "fixed magazine" means an ammunition feeding device contained in, or pennanently attached to, 
a firearm in such a manner that the device cannot be removed without disassembly of the fireann action. 

(c) The Legislature finds a significant public purpose in  exempting from the definition of"assault weapon" pistols that are 
designed expressly for use in Olympic target shooting events. Therefore, those pistols that are sanctioned by the International 
Olympic Committee and by USA Shooting, the national governing body for international shooting competition in the United 
States, and that were used for Olympic target shooting purposes as of January 1, 200 l, and that would otherwise fall within the 
definition of"assault weapon" pursuant to this section are exempt, as provided in subdivision (d). 

(d) "Assault weapon" does not include either ofthe following: 

(I) Any antique firearm. 

(2) Any of the following pistols, because they are consistent with the significant public purpose expressed in subdivision ( c): 

MA1"''1UFACTURER 

MODEL 

BENELLI 

BENELLI 

BENELLI 

BENELLI 

HAMMERLI 

HAMMERLI 

HAMM.ERL! 

HAMM.ERL! 

PARDINI 

PARDINI 

PARDINI 

PARDINI 

PARI)INI 

PARDINI 

WALTHER 

WALTHER 

WALTHER 

WALTHER 

MP90 

MP90 

MP95 

IvIP95 

280 

280 

SP20 

SP20 

GPO 

GP-SCHutvIANN 

HP 

MP 

SP 

SPE 

GSP 

GSP 

OSP 

OSP-2000 

CALIBER 

.22LR 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.32S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22 SHORT 

.22 SHORT 

.32S&WLONG 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.22LR 

.22LR 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22SHORT 

.22 SHORT 

(3) The Department of Justice shall create a program that is consistent with the purposes stated in subdivision (c) to exempt new 
models of competitive pistols that would otherwise fall within the definition of"assault weapon" pursuant to this section from 
being classified as an assault weapon. The exempt competitive pistols may be based on recommendations by USA Shooting 
consistent with the regulations contained in the USA Shooting Official Rules or may be based on the recommendation or rules of 
any other organization that the department deems relevant. 

SEC. 2. 
Section 30680 is added to the Penal Code, to read: 

t"\ 
.1 

30680. 
Section 30605 does not apply to the possession of an assault weapon by a person who has possessed the assault weapon prior to 
January  1, 2017, if all o:fthe following are applicable: 

(a) Prior to January 1, 2017, the person would have been eligible to register that assault weapon pursuant to subdivision (b) of 
Section 30900. 

(b) The person lawfolly possessed that assault weapon prior to January 1, 2017. 

(c) The person registers the assault weapon by January l, 2018,  in  accordance with subdivision (b) of Section 30900. 

SEC.3. 
Section 30900 of the Penal Code is amended to read: 

30900. 
(a) (I) Any person who, prior to June 1,  1989, lawfully possessed an assault weapon, as defined in  Fornier Section  12276, as 
added by Section 3 of Chapter 19 of the Statutes of 1989, shall register the firearm by January 1,  1991, and any person who 
lawfully possessed an assault weapon prior to the date it was specified as an assault weapon pursuant to  fom1er Section 12276.5, 
as added by Section 3 of Chapter 19 of the Statutes of 1989 or as amended by Section 1 of Chapter 874 ofthe Statutes ofl990 or 
Section 3 of Chapter 954 ofthe Statutes of 1991, shall register the firearm within 90 days with the Department of Justice pursuant 
to those procedures that the department may establish. 

(2) Except as provided in Section 30600, any person who lawfully possessed an assault weapon prior to the date it was defined as 
an assault weapon pursuant to former Section 12276.1, as it read in Section 7 of Chapter 129 of the Statutes of 1999, and which 
was not specified as an assault weapon under former Section 12276, as added by Section 3 of Chapter 19 of the Statutes of 1989 
or as amended at any time before January  1,  2001, or former Section 12276.5, as added by Section 3 of Chapter 19 ofthe Statutes 
of 1989 or as amended at any time before J a.nuary 1, 2001, shall register the firearm by January 1,  2001, with the department 
pursuant to those procedures that the department may establish. 

(3) The registration shall contain a description of the firear1n that identifies it uniquely, including all identification marks ..  the full 
name, address, date of birth, and thumbprint of the owner, and any other information that the department may deem appropriate. 

(4) The department may charge a fee for registration ofup to twenty dollars ($20) per person but not to exceed the reasonable 
processing costs ofthe department. After the department establishes fees sufficient to reimburse the department for processing 
costs, fees charged shall increase at a rate not to exceed the legislatively approved annual cost-of-living adjustment for the 
department's budget or as otherwise increased through the Budget Act but not to exceed the reasonable costs of the department. 
The fees shall be deposited into the Dealers' Record of Sale Special Account. 

(b) (I) Any person who, from  January  l, 200 L to December 31, 2016, inclusive, lawfully possessed an  assault weapon that does 
not have a fixed magazine, as defined in Section 30515, including those weapons with an ammunition feeding device that can be 
readily removed from  the fireann  with  the use ofa tool, shall register the fireann before January l, 2018, but not before the 
effective date of the regulations adopted pursuar1t to paragraph (5), with the department pursuar1t to those procedures that the 
department may establish by regulation pursuant to paragraph (5). 

(2) Registrations shall be submitted electronically via the Intemet utilizing a public-facing application made available by the 
department. 

(3) The registration shall contain a description ofthe firearm that identifies it uniquely, including all identification marks, the date 
the firearm was acquired, the name and address of the individual from  whom, or business from which, the firearm  was acquired, 
as well as the registrant's full  name, address, telephone number, date of birth, sex, height, weight,  eye color, hair color, a.nd 
California driver's license number or California identification card number. 

(4) The department may charge a fee in an amount ofup to fifteen dollars ($15) per person but not to exceed the reasonable 
processing costs of the department. The fee shall be paid by debit or credit card at the time that the electronic registration is 
submitted to the department. The fee shall be deposited in the Dealers' Record of Sale Special Account to be used for purposes of 
this section. 

(5) The department shall adopt regulations for the purpose of implementing this subdivision. These regulations are exempt from 
the Administrative Procedure Act (Chapter 3.5 ( commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 ofthe 
Government Code). 

SEC. 4. 
No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 ofArticle XIII B ofthe California Constitution because the onlv 
costs that may be incmTed by a local agency or school district will be incmTed because this act creates a new crime or infractio~, 
eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 ofthe 
Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B ofthe California 
Constitution. 

