July 14, 2016 

VIA EXPRESS  MAIL 

The Honorable Kamala  D.  Harris 
Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 1ih Floor, P.O.  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

16-0007 


=· f RECEIVED 

JUL  15  2016

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

Re: 

Request for Title and Summary for Proposed Referendum (Senate Bill No. 880) 

Dear Ms.  Harris: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 9, of the California Constitution, I hereby submit the attached proposed 
referendum (veto referendum) and request a circulating title and summary for petitions to collect 
signatures from California voters.  I have attached the complete text of the bill, which is Assembly Bill 
No. 1135. 

I,  Barry Bahrami, declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United States, 18 years of 
age or older, and a resident of (insert county), California." (Elec. Code,§ 9001.) 

I,  Barry Bahrami, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 18650 of the Elections 
Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an initiative petition to be used for any purpose 
other than qualification of the proposed measure for the ballot. I certify that I will not knowingly or 
willfully allow the signatures for this initiative to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the 
measure for the ballot." (Elec. Code, § 9608.) 

My mailing address for purposes of this referendum is: 

7668 El  Camino Real 
Suite 104-627 
Carlsbad, CA 92009 
Barry@VetoGunmageddon.org 

I have attached my personal registered voter address to letter. 

Sincerely, 

6-------=- ~~~ 

Barry Bahrami 
Proponent 
enclosures 

16-0007 


Senate Bill No. 880 

CHAPTER48 

An act to amend Sections 30515 and 30900 of, and to add Section 30680 to, the Penal Code, relating to firearms. 

[ Approved by Governor  July OI, 2016. Filed with Secretary of State  July OI, 2016. ] 

LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGEST 

SB 880, Hall. Firearms: assault weapons. 

(l) Existing law generally prohibits the possession or transfer of assault weapons, except for the sale, purchase, importation, or 
possession of assault weapons by specified individuals, including law enforcement officers. Under existing law, "assault weapon" 
means, among other things,  a semiautomatic centerfire rifle or a semiautomatic pistol that has the capacity to accept a detachable 
magazine and has ar1y one of specified attributes, including, for rifles, a thurnbhole stock, and for pistols, a second handgrip. 

This bill would revise this definition of·'assault weapon" to mean a semiautomatic centerfire rifle,  or a semiautomatic pistol that 
does not have a fixed magazine but has any one of those specified attributes. The bill would also define "fixed magazine" to 
mean an  ammunition feeding device contained in, or pe1manently attached to,  a firearm in such a manner that the device cannot 
be removed without disassembly ofthe firearm action. 

By expanding the definition of ru.1  existing crime, the bill would impose a state-mar,dated local program. 

(2) Existing law requires that any person who, within this state, possesses an assault weapon, except as otherwise provided, be 
punished as a felony or for a period not to exceed one year in a county jail. 

This bill would exempt from punishment under that provision a person who possessed an assault weapon prior to January 1, 
2017, if specified requirements are met. 

(3) Existing law requires that, with specified exceptions, any person who. prior to January 1, 2001, lawfully possessed ru.1  assault 
weapon prior to the date it wa.<;  defined as an a.'>sault weapon, and which was !}Ot specified as an assault weapon at the time of 
lawful possession, register the firearm with the Department of Justice. Existing law permits the Department of Justice to charge a 
fee  for registration of up to $20 per person but not to exceed the actual processing costs of the depa1iment. Existing law, a:ller the 
department establishes foes  sufficient to reimburse the department for-processing costs, requires foes  charged to increase at a rate 
not to exceed the legislatively approved annual  cost-of-living adjustment :for the department's budget or as otherwise increased 
through the Budget Act. Existing law requires those fees to be deposited into the Dealers' Record of Sale Special Account. 
Existing law, the Administrative Procedure Act, establishes the requirements for the adoption, publication, review, and 
implementation ofregulations by state agencies. 

This bill would require that any person who, from Januar·y  1, 2001, to December 31, 2016, inclusive, lawfully possessed an 
assault weapon that does not have a fixed magazine, as defined, and including those weapons with an ammunition feeding device 
that can be removed readily from the firearm with the use of a tool, register the firearm with the Department of Justice before 
January 1,  2018, but not before the effective date of specified regulations. The bill would pennit the depaitment to  increase the 
$20 registration foe as  long as it does not exceed the reasonable processing costs of the depar1ment.  The bill would also require 
registrations to be submitted electronically via the Internet utilizing a public-facing application made available by the department. 
The bill would require the registration to contain specified infonnation, including, but not limited to, a description of the firear·m 
that identifies it uniquely and specified information about the registrant. The bill would pe1mit the department to char·ge a fee of 
up to $15 per person for registration through the Internet, not to exceed the reasonable processing costs of the department to be 
paid filld deposited, as specified, for purposes ofthe registration program. The bill would require the department to adopt 
regulations for the purpose of implementing those provisions and ,vould exempt those regulations from the Administrative 
Procedure Act. The bill would also make technical arid conforming char1ges. 

(4) The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by 
the state. Statutm-y provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement. 

This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason. 

DIGEST KEY 
Vote: MAJORITY  Appropriation: NO  Fiscal Committee: YES  Local Program: YES 

BILL TEXT 

THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DO ENACT AS FOLLOWS: 


SECTION 1. 

Section 30515 of the Penal Code is amended to read: 

30515. 
(a) Notwithstanding Section 30510, "assault weapon" also  means any of the following: 

(1) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that does not have a fixed magazine but has any one ofthe following: 

(A) A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon. 

(B) A thumbhole stock. 

(C) A folding or telescoping stock. 

(D) A grenade launcher or fiare launcher. 

(E) A flash  suppressor. 

(F) A forward pistol grip. 

(2) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has a fixed magazine with the capacity to accept more than l Orounds. 

(3) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has an overall length ofless than 30 inches. 

(4) A semiautomatic pistol that does not have a fixed magazine but has any one of the following: 

(A) A threaded ban·el, capable of accepting a flash suppressor, forward handgrip, or silencer. 

(B) A second handgrip. 

(C) A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles, the barrel that allows the bearer to fire the weapon without 
burning the bearer's hand, except a slide that encloses the barrel. 

(D) The capacity to accept a detachable magazine at some location outside of the pistol grip. 

(5) A semiautomatic pistol with a fixed magazine that has the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds. 

(6) A semiautomatic shotgun that has both of the following: 

(A) A folding or telescoping stock. 

(B) A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon, thumbhole stock,  or ve1tical handgrip. 

(7) A semiautomatic shotgun that has the ability to accept a detachable magazine. 

(8) Any shotgun with a revolving cylinder. 

(b) For purposes ofthis section, "fL\'.ed magazine" means an ammunition feeding device contained in, or pennanently attached to, 
a firearm in such a manner that the device cannot be removed without disassembly of the fireann action. 

(c) The Legislature finds a significant public purpose in  exempting from the definition of"assault weapon" pistols that are 
designed expressly for use in Olympic target shooting events. Therefore, those pistols that are sanctioned by the International 
Olympic Committee and by USA Shooting, the national governing body for international shooting competition in the United 
States, and that were used for Olympic target shooting purposes as of January 1, 2001, and that would otherwise fall within the 
definition of"assault \Veapon'' pursuant to this section are exempt, as provided in subdivision (d). 

(d) "Assault weapon" does not include either ofthe following: 

(I) Any antique firearm. 

(2) Any of the following pistols, because they are consistent with the significant public purpose expressed in subdivision ( c): 

:tv1ANUFACTURER 

MODEL 

BENELLI 

BENELLI 

BENELLI 

BENELLI 

HAMMERLI 

HAMI\ffiRLI 

HAMMERLI 

HAMMERLI 

PARDINI 

PARDINI 

PARIJINI 

PARIJINI 

PARDINI 

PARIJINI 

WALTHER 

WALTHER 

WALTHER 

WALTHER 

MP90 

Ml~9o 

MP95 

MP95 

280 

280 

SP20 

SP20 

GPO 

GP-SCHUtvIANN 

HP 

MP 

SP 

SPE 

GSP 

GSP 

OSP 

OSP-2000 

CALIBER 

.22LR 

.32S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.32S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.32 S&WLONG 

.22 SHORT 

.22 SHORT 

.32 S&WLONG 

.32S&WLONG 

.22LR 

.22LR 

.22LR 

.32S&WLONG 

.22 SHORT 

.22SHORT 

(3) The Department ofJustice shall create a program that is consistent with  the purposes stated in subdivision (c) to exempt new 
models of competitive pistols that would otherwise fall within the definition of"assault weapon" pursuant to this section from 
being classified as an assault weapon. The exempt competitive pistols may be based on recommendations by USA Shooting 
consistent with the regulations contained in the USA Shooting Official Rules or may be based on the recommendation or rules of 
any other organization that the department deems relevant. 

SEC. 2. 
Section 30680 is added to the Penal Code, to read: 

30680. 
Section 30605 does not apply to the possession of an assault weapon by a person who has possessed the assault weapon prior to 
January  1, 2017, if all of the following are applicable: 

(a) Prior to January 1, 2017, the person was eligible to register that assault weapon pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 30900. 

(b) The person lawfully possessed that assault weapon prior to  January  1, 2017. 

(c) The person registers the assault weapon by January 1,  2018, in accordance with subdivision (b) of Section 30900. 

SEC. 3. 
Section 30900 of the Penal Code is amended to read: 

30900. 
(a) (1) Any person who, prior to June 1,  1989, lawii.rlly possessed ar1  assault weapon, as defined in former Section 12276, as 
added by Section 3 of Chapter .19  of the Statutes of 1989, shall register the fireann by January 1,  l99L and any person who 
lawii.rlly possessed an assault weapon prior to the date it was specified as an assault weapon pursuant to former Section 12276.5, 
as added by Section 3 o:f Chapter 19 ofthe Statutes of 1989 or as arnended by Section l  of Chapter 874 of the Statutes of 1990 or 
Section 3 of Chapter 954 ofthe Stan1tcs of 1991, shall register the firearm within 90 days with the Department of Justice pursuant 
to those procedures that the department may establish. 

(2) Except as provided in Section 30600, any person who lawii.rlly possessed an assault weapon prior to the date it was defined as 
an assault weapon pursuant to fo1mer Section 12276.1, as it read in Section 7 of Chapter 129 of the Statutes of 1999, and which 
was not specified as an assault weapon under former Section 12276, as added by Section 3 of Chapter 19 ofthe Stan1tes of 1989 
or as arnended at m1y time before January 1,  200L or fonner Section 12276.5, as added by Section 3  of Chapter 19 of the Statutes 
of 1989 or as amended at any time before January 1, 2001, shall register the firearm by January 1,  2001, with the department 
pursuant to those procedures that the department may establish. 

(3) The registration shall contain a description of the firearm that identifies it uniquely, including all identification marks, the full 
name, address, date of birth, and thumbprint of the owner, and any other infonnation that the department may deem appropriate. 

(4) The department may charge a fee for registration ofup to twenty dollars ($20) per person but not to exceed the reast'mable 
processing costs of the department. After the depariment establishes fees sufficient to reimburse the department for processing 
costs, fees charged shall increase at a rate not to exceed the legislatively approved annual cost-of-living adjustment for the 
department's budget or as othenvisc increased through the Budget Act but not to exceed the reasonable costs of the department. 
The :fees shall be deposited into the Dealers' Record of Sale Special Account. 

(b) (1) Any person who, from January 1, 2001, to December 31, 2016, inclusive, lawfully possessed an assault weapon that does 
not have a :fixed magazine, as defined in  Section 30515, including those weapons with an ammunition feeding device that can be 
readily removed from the firearm with the use of a tool, shall register the firearm before January 1, 2018, but not before the 
effective date of the regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (5),  with the department pursuant to those procedures that the 
department may establish by regulation pursuant to paragraph (5). 

(2) Registrations shall be submitted electronically via the Internet utilizing a public-facing application made available by the 
department. 

(3) The registration shall contain a description of the firearm that identifies it uniquely, including all identification marks, the date 
the firearm was acquired, the name and address of the individual from whom,  or business from which, the firearm was acquired, 
as well as the registrant's full name, address, telephone number, date of birth, sex, height, weight, eye color, hair color, and 
California driver's license number or California identification card number. 

(4) The department may charge a fee in an  amount o:fup to :fifteen dollars ($15) per person but not to exceed the reasonable 
processing costs ofthe department. The fee shall be paid by debit or credit card at the time that the electronic registration is 
submitted to the department. The fee shall be deposited in the Dealers' Record of Sale Special Account to be used for purposes of 
this section. 

(5) The department shall adopt regulations for the purpose of implementing this subdivision. These regulations are exempt from 
the Administrative Procedure Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the 
Government Code). 

SEC. 4. 

No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 ofArticle XllI B o:fthe California Constitution because the only 
costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incmTed because this act creates a new crime or infraction, 
eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the 
Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California 
Constitution. 

