17-00 28 


RECEIVED 

SEP  O 5 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Ms. Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office ofthe Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, California 95814 

August 30, 2017 

Re:  Request for title and summary 

Dear Ms.  Johansson: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 10( d) of the California Constitution, this letter requests that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purpose and points of the 
enclosed ballot initiative:  "California Education Tax Relief Act."  Also enclosed are the required 
signed statements per California Elections Code, and a check in the amount of $2,000. 

Please direct all inquiries and correspondence regarding this proposed initiative to the 
undersigned. 

Sincerely, 

Lee Olson 
Chairman 
Committee to End Slavery 
16458 Bolsa Chica Street, #165 
Huntington Beach, CA  92649 

Enclosures:  Initiative language, Certifications and check 

1  7  - 0  0  2  8
 

SECTION 1.  Title.  This measure shall be known and may be cited as the "California Education 
Tax Relief Act." 

SECTION 2.  Findings and Declarations 

A.  The Committee to End Slavery makes the following findings: 

(1) 	 In May 2016 the NEA reported per-pupil cost for California K-12 government 

schools was $11,329. 

(2)  Education Week ranked California K-12 schools 10th from the bottom among the 50 
states with Quality Counts 2017 scores of K-12 Achievement, D+; School Finance, 
D+; Chance for Success, C+, and an Overall Grade of C-. 

(3)  Peter Wood, President of the National Association of Scholars stated that the 

Common Core government education program is flooding colleges with students 
unprepared to do college level work.  "Common Core pretended that it was going to 
be raising standards, but what it did, in fact, is put enormous pressure on colleges, 
many of which are now succumbing to that pressure, to lower their standards." 

(4)  Government school graduates have not only been dumbed down they're afflicted 
with arrested emotional development (AED) requiring universities and colleges to 
provide safe spaces stocked with cookies, coloring books, bubbles, Play-Doh, 
calming music, pillows, blankets and videos of frolicking puppies, as well as students 
and staff members trained to deal with trauma. 

(5)  Parents who care about the education and well-being of their children are 

increasingly seeking alternative schooling options such as private and home schools. 

(6)  Many of these options not only provide better results in terms of learning and 

personal development, their per-pupil cost is significantly lower than for government 
schools; 20% or less. 

(7)  Among the many outstanding, affordable options is the Ron Paul Curriculum 

(http://ronpaulcurriculum.com) for parents interested in providing their children with 
a quality education emphasizing the ideas of liberty while equipping students with a 
well-rounded education that includes courses in personal finance, public speaking and 
running a home business without putting ideological indoctrination ahead of 
education; unlike government schools. 

(8)  Parents pursuing alternative education are penalized unfairly by having to not only 

pay for their children's education but also by being forced to pay for the education of 

other children (and university/college students) enrolled in government schools via 
various government taxes, or other schemes, which extract their financial resources at 
gun point. 

(9)  All residents of California are forced to pay for the education of students enrolled in 

government schools via various government taxes, or other schemes, which extract 
their financial resources at gun point whether or not they are financially responsible 
for these students. 

(10)  The Committee to End Slavery fully supports the inviolable right of parents to 
control the education of their children, including in whatever setting they choose, 
even the uninformed choice of enrolling in government schools.  Our Creator never 
assigned the right and responsibility of a child's education to a government entity; the 
government has usurped that inviolable right and responsibility at gun point. 

(11)  The Committee to End Slavery condemns the theft of property (money) from 
Californian's, euphemistically called taxation, to pay for government schools. 
Especially when their primary purpose is to create a dumbed down populace easy to 
control and prepared only to service the (slave) labor needs of the oligarchy that rules 
over us. 

(12)  Any registered California voter who votes against this initiative is telling the whole 

world and their Creator that they support and endorse the theft of their neighbor's 
financial resources to finance government schools and, therefore, that they reject and 
are in full, open rebellion against the Creator's command, "Thou shalt not steal." 

Section 3.  Purpose and Intent. 

A.  To relieve the unfair, and immoral, government imposed penalty on loving parents 

who have to not only pay for the education of their children in alternative school 
settings but are also forced, at gun point, to pay for the education of children they are 
not financially responsible for who enroll in government schools. 

B.  To relieve California residents of the immoral burden of being forced, at gun point, to 
pay for the education of children they are not financially responsible for who enroll in 
government schools. 

Section 4.  The California Education Tax Relief Act.  Section 17 is added to Article IX ofthe 
California Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 17. 

(a) This Act shall be known as the "California Education Tax Relief Act." 

(b) Notwithstanding any provision ofthe Constitution to the contrary, no 
property, sales or income taxes or fees or other government schemes to extract 
financial resources shall be levied or assessed against California residents who 
do not have students they are financially responsible for enrolled in Article IX 
schools in order to pay for any free school provided for under Section 5 of 
Article IX, nor to pay for any Public School System or into the State School 
Fund provided for under Section 6 of Article IX, nor to pay for any bonds or 
district costs provided for under Section 6 1/2of Article IX, nor to pay for any 
textbooks provided for under Section 7.5 of Article IX, nor to pay for the 
University of California provided for under Section 9 of Article IX. 

SECTION 5.  Proponent Standing. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the State, its 
government agencies, or any of its officials fail to defend the constitutionality ofthis measure 
following its approval by the voters, any other government employee, any proponent, or, in their 
absence, any citizen of this state shall have the authority to intervene in any court action 
challenging the constitutionality of this measure for the purpose of defending its 
constitutionality, whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, or on discretionary review by 
the Supreme Court of California or the Supreme Court of the United States. The fees and costs of 
defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated to the Attorney General, which shall 
be satisfied promptly. 

