17-0027 


VIA MESSENGER 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office ofthe Attorney General 
1300 "I" Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA  95814 

August 31, 2017 

RECEIVED 

SEP  O 1 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 

The  California Consumer Privacy Act o/2018 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

In accordance with the requirements of Elections Code section 9001(a), I request 
that the Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purpose and points 
ofthe initiative measure entitled "The California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018."  The text of 
the measure, a check for $2,000.00, and the certifications required by Elections Code 
sections 900 I  and 9608 are enclosed. 

Please direct all correspondence and inquiries regarding this measure to: 

James C.  Harrison 
Kristen M.  Rogers 
Remcho, Johansen & Purcell, LLP 
1901  Harrison Street, Suite 1550 
Oakland, CA  94612 
Phone:  (510) 346-6200 
Fax:  (510) 346-6201 

Enclosures 
(00317424) 

17-0027 


THE CALIFORNIA CONSUMER PRIVACY ACT OF 2018 

SEC. 1.  Title. 

This measure shall be known and may be cited as "The California Consumer Privacy Act 
of2018." 

SEC. 2.  Findings and Declarations. 

The People of the State of California hereby find and declare all  of the following: 

In  1972, California voters amended the California Constitution to include the right of 

A. 
privacy among the "inalienable" rights of all people.  Voters acted in response to the accelerating 
encroachment on personal freedom and security caused by increased data collection in 
contemporary society.  The amendment established a legal and enforceable right of privacy for 
every Californian.  Fundamental to this right of privacy is the ability of individuals to control the 
use of their personal infonnation.  As a Californian, you retain your reasonable expectation of 
privacy even when you share your personal information with a third party. 

Since California voters approved the right of privacy, the California Legislature has 

B. 
adopted specific mechanisms to safeguard Californians' privacy, including the Online Privacy 
Protection Act, the Privacy Rights for California Minors in the Digital World Act, and Shine the 
Light, a California law intended to give Californians the "who, what, where, and when" of how 
businesses handle consumers'  personal information.  But technology has continued to advance 
exponentially and business practices have changed dramatically. 

C. 
Many businesses collect personal information from California consumers using hundreds 
of tracking and collection devices.  They not only know where you live and how many children 
you have, but also how fast you drive and your personality, sleep habits, biometric and health 
information, financial information, current location, and social networks, to name just a few 
categories.  California law has not kept pace with these developments. 

Businesses drive the market for consumers' personal information, and they profit from 

D. 
buying and selling your personal information and using it for commercial purposes. 

The proliferation of personal information over which consumers lack control has limited 

E. 
Californians' ability to properly protect and safeguard their privacy.  Businesses use this personal 
information for their own purposes, including selling it to,  and sharing it with, other businesses 
for their commercial purposes without your knowledge, and using it to offer you a different price 
or service, target you with ads, or to track your location, habits, and preferences for future 
commercial use.  Often, you may not even know that these records exist and cannot determine 
who has access to them or to whom they are being sold or with whom they are being shared. 

At the same time, you are in a position of relative dependence on businesses that collect 

F. 
your information.  It is easy for companies to monitor what you do as they collect ever­
increasing amounts and categories of data about you.  But it is difficult for you to monitor 
business operations or prevent companies from  using your personal information for the 
companies' financial  benefit.  Providing information to a company is not the same as making it 

1 


available to the public generally, and you have a reasonable expectation that businesses will 
respect your privacy. 

G. 
You should have the right to know what personal information businesses collect about 
you and your children and what they do with it, including how businesses use that information 
and who they sell it to. 

You should also be able to control the use of your,  and your children's, personal 

H. 
information, and be able to stop businesses from selling your information or sharing it for 
commercial purposes.  Your decision to tell a business to stop selling your personal information 
or sharing it for commercial purposes should not affect the price or quality of the goods or 
services you receive.  It is possible for businesses both to provide a high level of service and to 
respect your privacy. 

SEC. 3.  Purpose and Intent. 

In enacting this Act, it is the purpose and intent of the people of the State of California to further 
operationalize the constitutional right of privacy by giving consumers an effective way to control 
their personal information, thereby affording better protection of their own privacy and 
autonomy, by: 

Giving California consumers the right to know what categories of personal information a 

A. 
business has collected about them and their children. 

Giving California consumers the right to know what a business has done with that 

B. 
information, including what information it has sold, or shared for commercial purposes, and to 
whom it has been sold or shared. 

Requiring a business to disclose to a California consumer ifit sells or shares any of the 

C. 
consumer's personal information and allowing the consumer to tell the business to stop selling or 
sharing the consumer's personal information for the business or the buyer's commercial 
purposes. 

Preventing a business from  denying or changing a service or charging more if a 

D. 
California consumer refuses to allow the business to sell the consumer's personal information or 
share it for commercial purposes. 

SEC. 4.  The California Consumer Privacy Act shall be codified by adding Sections 1798.100 
to  1798.114, inclusive, to the Civil Code. 

SEC. 4.1.  Section 1798.100 is  added to  the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.100.  Right to Know What Personal Information is Being Collected. 

1798. 100.  (a) A consumer shall have the right to request that a business that has collected 
personal information about the consumer disclose to the consumer the categories of personal 
information it has collected about that consumer. 

2 


(b) A business that has collected personal information about a consumer shall disclose the 
information specified in subdivision (a) to the consumer upon receipt of a verifiable request from 
the consumer. 

SEC. 4.2.  Section 1798.101 is  added to  the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.101.  Right to Know How Personal Information is Used. 

1798.101.  (a) A consumer shall have the right to request that a business that sells the consumer's 
personal information, or shares it for commercial purposes, disclose to that consumer the 
categories of personal information collected about the consumer and the identity of the third 
parties to whom such personal information was sold,  or shared for commercial purposes, by 
category or categories of personal information for each third party to whom such personal 
information was sold, or shared for commercial purposes, and  any unique identifier or other 
method of identifying the personal information that was sold,  or shared for commercial purposes. 

(b) A business that sells personal information about a consumer, or shares it for commercial 
purposes, shall disclose the information specified in subdivision (a) to the consumer upon receipt 
of a verifiable request from the consumer. 

SEC. 4.3.  Section 1798.102 is added to the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.102.  Right to Say No to Sale of Personal Information. 

1798.102.  (a) A consumer shall have the right, at any time, to direct a business that sells 
personal information about the consumer, or shares it for commercial purposes, not to sell the 
consumer's personal information, or share it for commercial purposes. 

(b) A business that sells consumers'  personal information, or shares it for commercial purposes, 
shall provide notice to consumers that such information may be sold,  or shared for commercial 
purposes, and that consumers have the right to opt out of the sale of their personal information, 
or the sharing of it for commercial purposes, including instructions regarding how consumers 
may opt out of the sale of their personal information, or the sharing of it for commercial 
purposes. 

(c) A business that has received direction from a consumer not to sell the consumer's personal 
information, or share it for commercial purposes, shall be prohibited from  selling the consumer's 
personal information, or sharing it for commercial purposes, after its receipt of the consumer's 
direction, unless the consumer subsequently provides express authorization for the sale of the 
consumer's personal information, or the sharing ofit for commercial purposes. 

SEC. 4.4.  Section 1798.103 is added to the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.103.  Right to Equal Service and Price. 

1798.103.  A business that sells a consumer's personal information, or shares it for commercial 
purposes, shall be prohibited from discriminating against the consumer based on the consumer's 
request for information pursuant to sections 1798.100 or 1798.101, or based on the consumer's 

3 

decision to direct the business not to sell the consumer's personal information, or share it for 
commercial purposes, pursuant to section 1798.102, including but not limited to, by:  (a) denying 
goods or services to the consumer; (b) charging different prices or rates, including through the 
use of discounts or other benefits or imposing penalties, for such goods or services; (c) providing 
a different level or quality of such goods or services; or ( d) suggesting that the consumer will 
receive a different level or quality of such goods or services if the consumer exercises the 
consumer's rights under this Act. 

SEC. 4.5.  Section 1798.104 is  added to  the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.104.  Compliance with Disclosure Requirements. 

1798.104.  (a) In order to comply with sections 1798.100 and 1798.101, a business shall: 

(1) Make two or more designated methods for submitting requests available to consumers, 
including, at a minimum, a toll-free telephone number and a website address, if the business 
maintains a website. 

(2) Disclose the required information to a consumer free of charge within 30 days of receiving a 
verifiable request from the consumer.  The disclosure shall cover the twelve-month period 
preceding the business's receipt of the verifiable request. 

(3) For purposes of section 1798.100, identify all  categories of personal information collected 
about a consumer by reference to the enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c) that 
most closely describe the personal information and any unique identifier or other method of 
identifying the personal information collected. 

(4) For purposes of section 1798.101:  (A) identify by category or categories the personal 
information of a consumer which the business sold, or shared for commercial purposes, by 
reference to the enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c) that most closely describe 
the personal information, and any unique identifier or other method of identifying the personal 
information that the business sold, or shared for commercial purposes, and (B) provide accurate 
names and contact information for the third parties to whom the consumer's personal 
information was sold, or shared for commercial purposes. 

(5) Include a description of a consumer's rights pursuant to sections 1798.100 and 1798.101, and 
one or more designated methods for submitting requests in:  (A) its online privacy policy or 
policies if the business has an online privacy policy or policies and (B) any California-specific 
description of consumers'  privacy rights. 

(6) Ensure that all  individuals responsible for handling consumer inquiries about the business's 
privacy practices or the business's compliance with this Act are informed of all  requirements in 
sections 1798.100, 1798.101, and this section, and how to direct consumers to exercise their 
rights under those sections. 

(7) Use any personal infonnation collected from the consumer in connection with the business's 
verification of the consumer's request solely for the purposes of verification. 

4 


(b) A business is not obligated to provide the information required by sections 1798. 100 
and 1798. 101  to the same consumer more than once in a 12-month period, provided that the 
collection and use of that consumer's information has not changed since the last disclosure. 

(c) The categories of personal information required to be disclosed pursuant to sections 1798. 100 
and 1798.101  are all of the following: 

(1) 	 All  categories of personal information relating to characteristics of protected 

classifications under California or federal  law, with specific reference to the category 
of information that has been collected, such as race, ethnicity, or gender; 

(2) 	 All categories of personal information enumerated in the Shine the Light Act, 

California Civil Code sections 1798.83, et.  seq., including reference to the specific 
individual category or categories collected,  such as age or date of birth, names of 
children, or number of children; 

(3) 	 Unique identifiers; 
(4) 	 Any other identifier intended or able to be associated with a particular individual or 

device, including, but not limited to, a social security number, driver's license number, 
identifier assigned by a business or third party, or passport number; 

(5) 	 Commercial information, including records of property, products or services provided, 

obtained, or considered, or other purchasing or consuming histories or tendencies; 

(6) 	 Biometric data; 
(7) 	

Internet or other electronic network activity information including browsing history, 
search history,  and information regarding a consumer's interaction with a website, 
application, or advertisement; 

Photographs or images, including video images; 

(8) 	 Geolocation data; 
(9) 	
(10) 	 Psychometric information; 
(11) 	 Professional or employment-related information; 
(12) 	 Content, including text, photographs, audio or video recordings, or other material 

generated by or provided by the consumer; 

(13) 	 Any of the categories of information set forth in this subdivision as they pertain to the 

minor children of the consumer, including reference to the specific category or 
categories; 
Inferences drawn from  any of the information identified above, including reference to 
the specific category or categories from  which the inference was drawn;  and 

(14) 	

(15) 	 A category of personal information included within the scope of paragraph (15) of 
subdivision (I) of section 1798. 106, including a description of the type of personal 
information. 

SEC. 4.6.  Section 1798.105 is  added to the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.105.  Compliance with Opt-Out Requirements. 

1798.105.  (a) A business that is required to comply with sections 1798. 102 and  1798.103 shall: 

(1) Provide a clear and conspicuous link on the business's homepage titled solely "Do Not Sell 
My Personal Information, Or Share It For Commercial Purposes."  The link shall lead to a 
standalone screen, window, or webpage, which shall include only the following clear and 

5 

conspicuous text:  "We sell consumers' personal information,  or share itfor commercial 
purposes.  California law allows you to tell us not to sell your personal information,  or share it 
for commercial purposes,  and we are required to offer the same goods or sen,ices at the same 
price,  regardless ofwhether or not you permit us to sell your personal information,  or share it 
for commercial purposes.  Ifyou check the  box below, we will not sell your personal information, 
or share itfor commercial purposes. "  This text shall be followed by a box that a consumer may 
check that reads:  "Do not sell my personal information,  or share it for commercial purposes", 
and that includes a text entry field for the consumer's full name and zip code.  Other than the 
business's name, logo, and the information required in this paragraph, no other writing or 
information shall be allowed on the separate or standalone screen, window or webpage.  A 
business shall not require a consumer to log into a website or application, or create an account, in 
order to direct the business not to sell the consumer's personal information. 

(2) For in-person interactions, post a clear and conspicuous physical notice at the entrance to 
each location owned, leased, or operated by the business in California at which the business 
interacts with consumers that reads  "[Name of business]  sells consumers' personal information, 
or shares it for commercial purposes.  California law allows you to tell us not to sell your 
personal information,  or share itfor commercial purposes, and we are required to offer the same 
goods or services at the same price,  regardless ofwhether or not you permit us to sell your 
personal information,  or share itfor commercial purposes.  Ifyou would like to tell us not to sell 
your personal information,  or share itfor commercial purposes,  visit [URL] or call [toll-free 
number}."  The notice required by this paragraph shall be reasonably calculated, considering the 
alternative methods available under the circumstances, to make the notice available to the 
consumer during the non-electronic interaction.  Upon receiving a request from the consumer, 
the business shall provide a separate paper form or link to a dedicated webpage with only the 
following clear and conspicuous text:  "We sell consumers' personal information,  or share it for 
commercial purposes.  California law allows you to tell us not to sell your personal information, 
or share itfor commercial purposes,  and we are required to offer the same goods or services at 
the same price, regardless ofwhether or not you permit us to sell your personal information, or 
share itfor commercial purposes.  Ifyou check the  box below, we will not sell your personal 
information, or share itfor commercial purposes. "  This text shall be followed by a box that a 
consumer may check that reads:  "Do not sell my personal information,  or share it for 
commercial purposes",  and that includes a text entry field for the consumer's full  name and zip 
code.  Other than the business's name, logo, and the information required in this paragraph, no 
other writing or information shall be allowed on the paper or webpage.  A business shall not 
require a consumer to log into a website or application, or create an account, in order to direct the 
business not to sell the consumer's personal information. 

(3) Include a description of a consumer's rights pursuant sections 1798.l 02 and  1798.103, along 
with a separate link to the "Do Not Sell My Personal Information Or Share It For Commercial 
Purposes"  standalone screen, window, or webpage in:  (A) its online privacy policy or policies if 
the business has an online privacy policy or policies and (B) any California-specific description 
of consumers' privacy rights. 

(4) Ensure that all  individuals responsible for handling consumer inquiries about the business's 

privacy practices or the business's compliance with this Act are informed of all  requirements in 

sections 1798. l 02,  1798. 103, and this section, and how to direct consumers to exercise their 

rights under those sections. 


6 

(5) For consumers who exercise their right to opt out of the sale of their personal information, or 
the sharing ofit for commercial purposes, associate the name and zip code provided by the 
consumer, any unique identifiers associated with the consumer as part of the submission of the 
consumer's opt-out request, and any data or unique identifiers that the business would ordinarily, 
or could reasonably, have access to,  or would typically collect, when interacting with the 
consumer, to any personal information previously collected by the business that the business 
reasonably believes or probabilistically identifies to be that of the same consumer.  The business 
shall be prohibited from  selling all such personal information of the consumer, or sharing it for 
commercial purposes. 

(6) Provide a clear and conspicuous link on the business's homepage or a designated method of 
submitting requests available upon request to allow a consumer who has opted out of the sale of 
the consumer's personal infonnation, or the sharing of it for commercial purposes, to authorize 
the business to sell the consumer's personal information, or share it for commercial purposes, 
titled solely, "Allow [business name] To Sell My Personal Information, Or Share It For 
Commercial Purposes."  The link shall lead to a standalone screen, window, or webpage, or 
paper form in the case of a business that provides a designated address, that shall be titled 
"[Name ofBusiness] may sell my personal information,  or share it for commercial purposes," 
and that shall include only the following clear and conspicuous text:  "You have told us not to 
sell your personal information,  or share it for commercial purposes.  California law requires us 
to offer you the same goods or services at the same price, regardless ofwhether or notyou allow 
us to sell your personal information, or share it.for commercial purposes.  Ifyou would now like 
to permit us to sell your personal iriformation,  or share itfor commercial purposes, please check 
the box below. "  This text shall be followed by a box that a consumer may check that reads: 
"[Name ofBusiness] may sell my personal information,  or share it for commercial purposes", 
and that includes a text entry field for the consumer's full  name and zip code.  Other than the 
business's name, logo, and the information required in this paragraph, no other writing or 
information shall be allowed on the standalone screen, window, webpage, or paper form.  A 
business may not request or otherwise direct the consumer to submit a request for change in 
status, except as  provided in this paragraph. 

(b) A consumer, or a consumer on behalf of the consumer's minor child, may opt out of the sale 
of the consumer's personal information, or the sharing ofit for commercial purposes, by 
providing the consumer's full  name and zip code to the business through any means, and a 
consumer may authorize another person to opt out on the consumer's behalf, and a business shall 
comply with an opt-out request received, through any means, from a person authorized by the 
consumer to act on the consumer's behalf. 

SEC. 4.7.  Section 1798.106 is added to the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.106.  Definitions. 

1798.106.  For purposes of Sections 1798.100 to  1798.114, inclusive, the following definitions 
shall apply: 

(a) "Biometric data" means an individual's physiological, biological, or behavioral 
characteristics, including but not limited to:  retina or iris scan, fingerprint, hand scan, face scan, 

7 


keystroke patterns or rhythms, gait patterns or rhythms, voiceprint, sleep, health, or exercise 
data. 

(b) "Business" means: 

(1) a sole-proprietorship, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation, association, or 
other legal entity that is organized or operated for the profit or financial benefit of its 
shareholders or other owners, that collects consumers'  personal information, that does business 
in the State of California, and that has either one or more of the following:  (a) 50 or more 
employees; (b) annual gross sales in excess of$2,000,000; (c) assets in excess of$3,000,000; 
(d) ownership of,  or the right to use, records of personal information pertaining to 20,000 or 
more consumers; or (e) a primary business purpose of buying and selling consumers'  personal 
information. 

(2) any entity that controls or is controlled by a business, as  defined in paragraph (1) of this 
subdivision, and that shares common branding with the business.  "Control" means ownership of, 
or the power to vote, more than 50 percent of the outstanding shares of any class of voting 
security of a business; control in any manner over the election of a majority of the directors, or of 
individuals exercising similar functions;  or the power to exercise, directly or indirectly, a 
controlling influence over the management or policies of a company.  "Common branding" 
means a shared name,  servicemark, or trademark. 

(c) "Clear and conspicuous" means (1) in a color that contrasts with the background color or is 
otherwise distinguishable; (2) written in larger type than the surrounding text that calls attention 
to the language; and (3) displayed so that a reasonable viewer would be able to notice, read,  and 
understand it.  In the case of an audio disclosure, "clear and conspicuous" means in a volume and 
cadence sufficient to be readily audible and understandable. 

(d) "Commercial purposes" means to advance a person's commercial interests, such as by 
inducing a person to buy, rent, lease, join, subscribe to, provide, or exchange products, goods, 
property, information, or services, or enabling or effecting, directly or indirectly, a commercial 
transaction.  "Commercial purposes" do not include for the purpose of engaging in non­
commercial speech. 

(e) "Collected" or "collection" means gathering, obtaining, storing, using, monitoring, inferring, 
or accessing any personal information pertaining to a consumer by any means, regardless of the 
length of time the information is retained and whether or not the interaction with the consumer 
involved the exchange of consideration, including but not limited to:  (1) requesting, prompting, 
or encouraging a consumer to submit personal information to the business;  (2) tracking a 
consumer's activity online; (3) tracking a consumer through any means of geolocation; 
(4) accessing or obtaining a consumer's personal information from  a person other than the 
consumer; or (5) obtaining a consumer's personal information through a commercial transaction, 
advertising, marketing, or any other interaction with the consumer. 

(f) "Consumer" means a natural person who is a California resident, as defined on September 1, 
2017, in the California Code of Regulations, title 18,  section 17014, however identified, 
including by any unique identifier, where such identifier is used to collect or categorize personal 

8 


information about the resident, or by a computer, device,  or software program or application 
owned or primarily used by that resident or that is otherwise associated with that resident. 

(g) "Designated methods for submitting requests" means a mailing address, e-mail address, Web 
page, Web portal, toll-free telephone number, or other applicable contact infonnation, whereby 
consumers may submit a request or direction under this Act. 

(h) "Homepage" means the introductory page of a website and any webpage where personal 
information is collected.  In the case of an  online service, such as a mobile application, 
homepage means the application's platform page,  a link within the application, such as from the 
application configuration, "About," "Information," or settings page, and any other location that 
allows consumers to review the notice required by paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of 
section  1798.105 before downloading the application. 

(i) "Infer" or "inference" means the derivation of information, data, assumptions, or conclusions 
from facts,  evidence, or another source of information or data. 

(j) "In-person interaction" means a contact, transaction,  sale, purchase,  service, or 
communication that occurs or is conducted at a location owned, leased, or operated by the 
business in California at which the business interacts with the consumer.  "In-person interaction" 
does not include any interaction conducted exclusively online. 

(k) "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, firm,  partnership, joint venture, syndicate, 
business trust,  company,  corporation, limited liability company, association, committee, and any 
other organization or group of persons acting in concert. 

(I) "Personal information" means information or data possessed, used,  made available to,  or 
accessed by the business, that the business uses or could reasonably use, directly, indirectly, or 
probabilistically, including through the use of any  algorithm, method, or series of steps involving 
different businesses, technologies, or fonnulas, to identify, relate to,  or describe, alone or in 
combination with other information, a consumer.  Personal information includes any information 
described in the following categories: 

(l) 	 Characteristics of protected classifications under California or federal law; 
(2) 	 All  categories of personal infonnation enumerated in the Shine the Light Act, 


California Civil Code sections 1798.83, et.  seq.; 


(3) 	 Unique identifiers; 
(4) 	 Any other identifier intended or able to be associated with a particular individual or 

device, including, but not limited to, a social security number, driver's license number, 
identifier assigned by a business or third party, or passport number; 

(5) 	 Commercial information, including records of property, products or services provided, 

(6) 	
(7) 	

obtained, or considered, or other purchasing or consuming histories or tendencies; 
Biometric data; 
Internet or other electronic network activity information including browsing history, 
search history, and information regarding a consumer's interaction with a website, 
application, or advertisement; 

(8) 	 Geolocation data; 
(9) 	

Photographs or images, including video images; 

9 

(10) 	 Psychometric information; 
(11) 	 Professional or employment-related information; 
(12) 	 Content, including text, photographs, audio or video recordings, or other material 

generated by or provided by the consumer; 

(13) 	 Any of the categories of information set forth in this subdivision as they pertain to the 

minor children of the consumer; 
Inferences drawn from  any of the information identified above; and 

(14) 	
(15) 	 Any other information or data not enumerated in paragraphs (1) through (14) that is 

used to identify, or is associated with, a consumer. 

"Personal information" does not include infonnation that is publicly available. 

(m) "Probabilistic identifier," or "probabilistically ... identify," "probabilistically identified," or 
"identify ... probabilistically," means the identification of a consumer to a degree of certainty of 
more probable than not based on some or all  of the categories enumerated in subdivision(!). 

(n) "Psychometric information" means information derived or created from  the use or application 
of psychometric theory or psychometrics, whereby through the use of any method, model, tool, 
or formula,  observable phenomena, such as  actions or events, are connected, measured, assessed, 
or related to a consumer's attributes, including, but not limited to, psychological trends, 
preferences, predispositions, behavior, attitudes, intelligence, abilities, and aptitudes. 

(o) "Publicly available" means information that is lawfully made available from federal,  state, or 
local government records or information that the consumer has voluntarily made publicly 
available without any restriction on who can access such information.  "Publicly available" does 
not mean biometric information collected by a business about a consumer without the 
consumer's knowledge. 

(p) "Sell," "selling," "sale," or "sold," means:  (1) the selling, renting, release, disclosure, use, 
accessing, disseminating, making available, transferring, or otherwise communicating orally, in 
writing, or by electronic or other means, a consumer's personal information by the business to a 
third party, for economic consideration or for other commercial purposes of the business; 
(2) permitting any third party, for economic consideration or for other commercial purposes of 
the business, to monitor, obtain, access,  or use the activity or history of any consumer's 
interactions with the business; and (3) permitting any third party, for economic consideration or 
for other commercial purposes of the business, to place any tracking or identifying device such 
as  a cookie, beacon, pixel, or other technology that allows a consumer's personal information to 
be monitored, obtained, accessed, or used. 

(q) "Service" or "services" means work, labor, and services, including services furnished in 
connection with the sale or repair of goods. 

(r) "Share," "shares," "shared," or "sharing" means providing a consumer's personal 
information, whether for consideration or not, to a third party. 

(s) "Third party" means any person who is not: 

(1) 

The business that collects personal information from  consumers under this Act; or 

10 

(2) 	 A person hired or otherwise engaged or used by the business pursuant to a written 

contract authorizing use of the personal information to perform services on behalf of 
the business, including maintaining or servicing accounts, providing customer service, 
processing or fulfilling orders and transactions, verifying customer information, 
processing payments, providing financing, or similar services, but only if:  (A) the 
contract prohibits the person from using the personal information for any reason other 
than performing the specified service(s) on behalf of the business and from  selling any 
such personal information; (B) the contract requires that the personal information be 
deleted or destroyed by the person as  soon as the personal information is no longer 
necessary to fulfill the services specified in the contract or comply with other legal 
obligations; and (C) the business effectively enforces these prohibitions. 

(t) "Unique identifiers" means a device or browser identifier; Internet Protocol address/es; 
computer or phone operating system information; phone network information; device hardware 
or software information; cookies, beacons, pixel tags, mobile ad identifiers, or similar 
technology;  customer number, unique pseudonym, or user alias;  application information; 
telephone information including telephone numbers, forwarding numbers, time, date, type and 
duration of phone calls;  SMS information; device event information such as crashes, system 
activity, hardware settings, browser type, browser language; date, time and nature of search 
requests and referral URL or HTTP referrer; or similar identification methods;  or some 
combination thereof, or other forms  of persistent identifiers that can be used to identify a device 
or consumer either directly, indirectly, or probabilistically. 

(u) "Verifiable request" means a request that:  (!) is made by a consumer, by a consumer on 
behalf of the consumer's minor child, or by a person authorized by the consumer to act on the 
consumer's behalf; and (2) the business, taking into consideration available technology and using 
reasonable efforts, has probabilistically identified to be the consumer about whom the business 
has collected personal information. 

SEC. 4.8.  Section 1798.107 is added to  the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.107.  Exemptions. 

1798.107.  (a) The obligations imposed on businesses by sections 1798.100 through  1798.105 
shall not restrict a business's ability to: 

(1) comply with federal laws; 

(2) comply with a civil, criminal, or regulatory investigation or subpoena or summons by federal, 
state, or local authorities; or 

(3) cooperate with law enforcement agencies concerning conduct or activity that the business 
reasonably believes may violate federal,  state, or local law. 

(b) The obligations imposed on businesses by sections 1798.100 through 1798.105 shall not 
apply where compliance by the business with the Act would violate an evidentiary privilege 
under California law or where the business provides the personal information to a person covered 
by an evidentiary privilege under California law. 
11 

(c) This Act shall  not apply to protected health information that is collected by a covered entity 
governed by the medical privacy and security rules issued by the Federal Department of Health 
and Human Services, Parts 160 and  164 of Title 45  of the Code of Federal Regulations, 
established pursuant to the Health Insurance Portability and Availability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). 
For purposes of this subdivision, the definitions of"protected health information" and "covered 
entity" from the privacy rule shall apply. 

(d) This Act shall not apply to the sale of personal information to or from  a consumer reporting 
agency if that information is to be reported in, or used to generate, a consumer report as defined 
by subdivision (d) of Section 168l(a) of Title 15 of the United States Code,  and use of that 
information is limited by the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act,  15 U.S.C.  § 1681, et.  seq. 

SEC. 4.9.  Section 1798.108 is  added to  the Civil Code, to  read: 

1798.108.  Enforcement By Consumers Who Have Suffered An Injury In Fact. 

1798.108.  (a) A consumer who has suffered a violation of this Act may bring an action for 
statutory damages.  For purposes of Business and Professions Code section 17204 and any other 
applicable law,  a violation of this Act shall be deemed to constitute an injury in fact to the 
consumer who has suffered the violation, and the consumer need not suffer a loss of money or 
property as a result of the violation in  order to bring an action for a violation of this Act. 

(b)(1) Any consumer who suffers an injury in fact,  as described in subdivision (a) of this section, 
shall recover statutory damages in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or actual 
damages, whichever is greater, for each violation from the business or person responsible for the 
violation, except that in the case of a knowing and willful violation by a business or person, an 
individual shall recover statutory damages of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) and not 
more than three thousand dollars ($3,000), or actual  damages, whichever is greater, for each 
violation from the business or person responsible for the violation. 

(2) In assessing the amount of statutory damages, the court shall consider any one or more of the 
relevant circumstances presented by any of the parties to the case, including, but not limited to, 
the following:  the nature and seriousness of the misconduct, the number of violations, the 
persistence of the misconduct, the length of time over which the misconduct occurred, the 
willfulness of the defendant's misconduct,  and the defendant's assets, liabilities, and net worth. 

(c) The remedies provided by this section are cumulative to each other and to the remedies or 
penalties available under all other laws of this State. 

SEC. 4.10.  Section 1798.109 is  added to the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.109.  Enforcement by Public Entities. 

1798.109.  (a) Any business or person that violates this Act shall be liable for a civil penalty as 
provided in section 17206 of the Business and Professions Code in a civil action brought in the 
name of the people of the State of California by the Attorney General, by any district attorney, 
by any county counsel authorized by agreement with the district attorney in actions involving 
violation of a county ordinance, by any city attorney of a city having a population in excess 

12 

of 750,000, by any city attorney of any city and county, or, with the consent of the district 
attorney, by a city prosecutor in any city having a full-time city prosecutor, in any court of 
competent jurisdiction. 

(b) Notwithstanding section 17206 of the Business and Professions Code, any or person business 
that intentionally violates this Act may be liable for a civil penalty ofup to $7,500 for each 
violation. 

(c) Notwithstanding section 17206 of the Business and Professions Code, any civil penalty 
assessed pursuant to section 17206 for a violation of this Act shall be awarded as follows: 

(1) 20 percent to the Consumer Privacy Fund, created within the General Fund pursuant to 
subdivision (a) of section  1798.110, with the intent to fully offset any costs incurred by the state 
courts and the Attorney General in connection with this Act. 

(2) 80  percent to the jurisdiction on whose behalf the action leading to the civil penalty was 
brought. 

(d) The Legislature shall  adjust the percentages specified in subdivision (c) of this section and in 
subdivision (b) of section 1798.111, as necessary to ensure that any civil penalties assessed for a 
violation of this Act fully  offset any costs incurred by the state courts and the Attorney General 
in connection with this Act, including a sufficient amount to cover any deficit from  a prior fiscal 
year.  The Legislature shall not direct a greater percentage of assessed civil penalties to the 
Consumer Privacy Fund than reasonably necessary to fully offset any costs incurred by the state 
courts and the Attorney General in connection with this Act. 

SEC. 4.11.  Section  1798.110 is  added to the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.110.  Consumer Right To Privacy Fund. 

1798.110.  (a) A special account to be known as the "Consumer Privacy Fund" is hereby created 
within the General Fund in the State Treasury, and,  notwithstanding Government Code 
section 13340, is continuously appropriated without regard for fiscal year to offset any costs 
incurred by the state courts in connection with actions brought to enforce this Act and any costs 
incurred by the Attorney General in carrying out the Attorney General's duties under this Act. 

(b) Funds transferred to the Consumer Privacy Fund shall be used exclusively to offset any costs 
incurred by the state courts and the Attorney General in connection with this Act.  Such funds 
shall not be subject to appropriation or transfer by the Legislature for any other purpose, unless 
the Director of Finance determines that the funds  are in excess of the funding needed to fully 
offset the costs incurred by the state courts and the Attorney General in connection with this Act, 
in which case the Legislature may appropriate excess funds for other purposes. 

13 


SEC. 4.12.  Section 1798.111 is  added to the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.111.  Enforcement by Interested Person on Behalf of Pnblic. 

(a) Any person may file a civil action for civil penalties pursuant to section 1798.109, if prior to 
filing such action, the person files with the Attorney General a written request for the Attorney 
General to commence the action.  The request shall include a statement of the grounds for 
believing a cause of action exists. 

(1) If the Attorney General files  suit within 90 days from  receipt of the written request to 
commence the action, no other action may be brought unless the action brought by the Attorney 
General is dismissed without prejudice. 

(2) If the Attorney General does not file suit within 90 days from receipt of the written request to 
commence the action, the person requesting the action may proceed to file a civil action. 

(3) The time period within which a civil action shall be commenced shall be tolled from the date 
of receipt by the Attorney General of the written request to either the date that the civil action is 
dismissed without prejudice, or for  150 days, whichever is later, but only for a civil  action 
brought by the person who requested the Attorney General to commence the action. 

(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (c) of section 1798.109, if a judgment is entered against the 
defendant or defendants in an action brought by a person pursuant to this section, that person 
shall receive seventy percent of the amount recovered and thirty percent shall be deposited in the 
Consumer Privacy Fund within the General Fund. 

SEC. 4.13.  Section  1798.112 is added to  the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.112.  Construction. 

1798.112.  This Act is intended to operationalize the constitutional right of privacy and to 
supplement existing laws relating to consumers' personal information, including but not limited 
to the California Internet Privacy Act (chapter 22 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions 
Code, commencing with section 22575) and the California Shine the Light Act (Title 1.81  of 
Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code, commencing with section 1798.80).  The provisions of 
this Act are not limited to information collected electronically or over the Internet, but apply to 
the collection and sale, or sharing for commercial purposes, of all  personal information collected 
by a business from consumers.  Wherever possible, existing law relating to consumers' personal 
information should be construed to harmonize with the provisions of this Act, but in the event of 
a conflict between existing law and the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the law that 
afford the greatest protection for the right of privacy shall control. 

SEC. 4.14.  Section 1798.113 is  added to  the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.113.  Imposition of Additional Privacy Safeguards. 

1798.113.  Nothing in this Act shall  prevent a city,  county, city and county, municipality, or local 
agency from  safeguarding the constitutional right of privacy by imposing additional 

14 

requirements regarding the collection and sale, or sharing for commercial purposes, of 
consumers'  personal information by businesses provided that the requirement does not prevent a 
person from  complying with this Act. 

SEC. 4.15.  Section 1798.114 is added to the Civil Code, to read: 

1798.114.  Regulations. 

1798.114.  (a) The Attorney General shall adopt regulations to further the purposes of this Act, 
including but not limited to: 

(1) Adding additional categories to those enumerated in subdivision (1) of section 1 798.106 and 
subdivision (c) of section 1798.104.  Upon receipt of a request made by a California city attorney 
or district attorney to add a new category or categories, the Attorney General shall promulgate a 
regulation to add such category or categories unless the Attorney General concludes, based on 
factual or legal findings,  that there is a compelling reason not to add the category or categories. 
The Attorney General may also add additional categories to those enumerated in subdivision (I) 
of section  1798.106 and subdivision (c) of section 1798.104 in response to a petition filed 
pursuant to section 11340.6 of the Government Code; 

(2) Adding additional items to the definition of "unique identifiers" to address changes in 
technology; 

(3) Establishing any exceptions necessary to comply with state and federal law; 

(4) Establishing rules and procedures pursuant to which a business complies with the 
requirements in subdivision (b) of section 1798.105 and the notice requirement in paragraph (2) 
of subdivision (a) of section 1798.105; 

(5) Adjusting the monetary thresholds in subparagraphs (b) and ( c) of paragraph (1) of 
subdivision (b) of section  1798.106 in January  of every odd-numbered year to reflect any 
increase in the Consumer Price Index; and 

(6) Establishing rules, procedures, and any exceptions necessary to ensure that the notices and 
information that businesses are required to provide pursuant to this Act are accessible to 
consumers with disabilities, and are available in the language primarily used to interact with the 
consumer. 

(b) The Attorney General shall be precluded from  adopting regulations that limit or reduce the 
number or scope of categories of personal information enumerated in subdivision ( c) of 
section 1798.104 and subdivision (1)  of section 1798.106, or that limit or reduce the number or 
scope of categories added pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a), except as necessary to 
comply with paragraph (3) of subdivision (a).  The Attorney General shall also be precluded 
from reducing the scope of the definition of "unique identifiers." 

(c) The Attorney General shall adopt any regulations the Attorney General deems necessary to 

implement this measure within six months of the date of the election at which it is adopted. 

Notwithstanding the California Administrative Procedure Act (APA),  and in order to facilitate 


15 

the implementation of this Act, the Attorney General may adopt interim regulations without 
compliance with the procedures set forth in the APA.  The interim regulations shall remain in 
effect for 270 days unless earlier superseded by regulations adopted pursuant to the APA. 

SEC. 5.  Amendment. 

This Act shall be broadly construed to accomplish its purposes.  The provisions of this Act may 
not be amended before the measure is approved by the voters.  The provisions of this Act may be 
amended so long as such amendments are consistent with and further the intent of this Act to 
protect the right of Californians to control the use of their personal information by a statute that 
is passed by a two-thirds vote of the members of each house of the Legislature and signed by the 
Governor.  In addition, the Legislature may amend subdivision (c) of section  1798.109 and 
subdivision (b) of section 1798.111, as specified in subdivision ( d) of section  1798. l 09, by a 
majority vote of the members of each house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor. 

SEC. 6.  Severability. 

If any provision of this measure, or part of this measure, or the application of any provision or 
part to any person or circumstances, is for any reason held to be invalid, the remaining 
provisions, or applications of provisions, shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and 
effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure are severable.  If a court were to find in a 
final,  unreviewable judgment that the exclusion of one or more entities or activities from the 
applicability of the Act renders the Act unconstitutional, those exceptions should be severed and 
the Act should be made applicable to the entities or activities formerly exempt from the Act.  It is 
the intent of the voters that this chapter would have been enacted regardless of whether an 
invalid provision had been included or an invalid application had been made. 

SEC. 7.  Conflicting Initiatives. 

(a) In the event that this measure and another measure addressing the privacy of personal 
information shall appear on the same statewide ballot, the provisions of the other measure or 
measures shall be deemed to be in conflict with this measure.  In the event that this measure 
receives a greater number of affirmative votes than a measure deemed to be in conflict with it, 
the provisions of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the other measure or measures 
shall be null  and void. 

(b) If this measure is approved by the voters but superseded by law by any other conflicting 
measure approved by voters at the same election, and the conflicting ballot measure is later held 
invalid, this measure shall be self-executing and given full force and effect. 

SEC. 8.  Standing. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the State, government agency, or any of its 
officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this Act, following its approval by the voters, any 
other government agency, the proponent, or in his or her absence, any citizen of this State shall 
have the authority to intervene in any court action challenging the constitutionality of this Act for 
the purpose of defending its constitutionality, whether such action is in trial  court, on appeal, or 
on discretionary review by the Supreme Court of California and/or the Supreme Court of the 

16 

United States.  The reasonable fees and costs of defending the action shall be a charge on funds 
appropriated to the California Department of Justice, which shall be satisfied promptly. 

SEC. 9.  Anti-Avoidance Provision. 

If a series of steps or transactions were component parts of a single transaction intended from the 
beginning to be taken for purposes of avoiding the reach of this Act, a court may disregard the 
intermediate steps or transactions for purposes of effectuating the purposes of this Act. 

SEC. 10.  Non-Waiver. 

Any provision of a contract or agreement of any kind that purports to waive or limit in any way a 
consumer's rights under this Act shall be deemed contrary to public policy and shall be void and 
unenforceable.  This section shall not prevent a consumer from:  declining to request information 
from a business; declining to opt out of a business's sale of the consumer's personal information, 
or its sharing of that information for commercial purposes; or authorizing a business to sell the 
consumer's personal information, or sharing it for commercial purposes, after previously opting 
out. 

SEC. 11.  Liberal Construction. 

This Act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. 

SEC. 12.  Savings Clause. 

This Act is intended to supplement federal  law, where permissible, but shall not apply where 
such application is preempted by, or in conflict with, federal  law, or the California Constitution. 

SEC. 13.  Effective Date. 

This Act shall only apply to personal information collected or sold by a business on or after 6 

months from the effective date. 


17 


