August  29 

.2017 

VIA PERSONAL DELIVERY 

Hon. Attorney General of California 
1300 I Street, 17th Floor, P.O.  Box 944255 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Attention:  Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 

17-0026 


RECEIVED

AUG  2 9 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE

Re:  Request for Title and Summary for Proposed Initiative Statute 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 10(d) of the California Constitution, I hereby 

submit the attached proposed Initiative Statute, entitled "The Prevention of Cruelty 
to Farm Animals Act," to your office and request preparation of a title and summary 
of the measure as provided by law.  Included with this submission are the required 
proponent affidavits signed by the proponent of this measure pursuant to Sections 
9001 and 9608 of the California Elections Code.  My address as a registered voter is 
attached to this letter, along with a check for $2,000.00. 

All inquires or correspondence relative to this initiative should be directed to 

Nielsen, Merksamer, Parrinello, Gross & Leoni, LLP,  1415 L Street, Suite 1200, 
Sacramento, CA 95814, (916) 446-6752, Attention: Kurt Oneto (telephone: 
916/446-6752). 

Thank you for your assistance. 

Sincerely, 

~~~Gu 

CheriShankar,Proponent 

Enclosure: Proposed Initiative Statute 

17-0026 


THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA DO ENACT AS  FOLLOWS: 

SECTION  1.  This  Act  shall  be  known  and  may  be  cited  as  the  Prevention  of Cruelty  to  Fann 
Animals Act. 

SECTION 2. The purpose of this Act is to prevent animal cruelty by phasing out extreme methods 
of farm  animal  confinement,  which also  tlu·eaten  the  health and  safety of California consumers, 
and  increase the  risk  of foodborne  illness  and  associated negative  fiscal  impacts  on the  State of 
California. 

SECTION 3. SECTION 25990 OF THE CALIFORNIA HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE rs  HEREBY AMENDED 
TO READ: 

In addition to other applicable provisions of law. 
(a)  a person A farm owner or operator within the State of California shall not tether or confine 
knowingly cause any covered animal, to  be confined in a cruel manner. on a fann, for all or the 
majority of any day, in a manner that prevents such animal from: 
(a) Lying down, standing up,  and fully extending his or her limbs; and 
(b) Turning around freely. 
(b) A business owner or operator shall not knowingly engage in the sale within the State of 
California of any: 

(1) Whole veal meat that the business owner or operator knows or should know is the 
meat of a covered animal who was confined in a cruel manner. 
(2) Whole pork meat that the business owner or operator knows or should know is the 
meat of a covered animal who was confined in a cruel manner, or is the meat of 
i1mnediate offspring of a covered animal who was confined in a cruel manner. 
(3)  Shell egg that the business owner or operator knows or should know is the product of 
a covered animal who was confined in a cruel manner. 
(4) Liquid eggs that the business owner or operator knows or should know are the 
product of a covered animal who was confined in a cruel manner. 

SECTION 4. SECTION 25991  OF THE CALIFORNIA HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE IS  HEREBY AMENDED 
TO READ: 

For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(a) "Breeding pig" means any female pig of the porcine species kept for the purpose of 
conunercial breeding, who is 6 months or older or pregnant. 
(b) "Business owner or operator" means any person who owns or controls the operations of a 
business. 
(c) "Cage-free housing system" means an indoor or outdoor controlled environment for egg­
laying hens within which hens are free to roam unrestricted; are provided enrichments that allow 
them to exhibit natural behaviors, including, at a minimum, scratch areas, perches, nest boxes, 
and dust bathing areas; and within which fann employees can provide care while standing within 
the hens' usable floor space. Cage-free housing systems include, to the extent they comply with 
the requirements of this subsection: 

(1)  "Multi-tiered aviaries" in which hens have access to multiple elevated platforms that 
provide hens with usable floor space both on top of and underneath the platfonns; 
(2) "Paitially-slatted systems" in which hens have access to elevated flat  platforms under 
which manure drops through the flooring to a pit or litter removal belt below; 
(3) "Single-level all litter floor systems" bedded with litter, and in which hens have 
limited or no  access to  elevated flat platfom1s; and 
(4)  Any future systems that will comply with the requireinents of this subsection. 
(a)(d)"Calf raised for veal" means any calf of the bovine species kept for the purpose of 
producing the food product described as  veal. 
(e) "Confined in a cruel manner" means any one of the following  acts: 

· 

(1) Confining a covered animal in a manner that prevents the animal from  lying down, 
standing up,  fully extending the animal's limbs, or turning around freely;  or 
(2)  After December 31, 2019, confining a calf raised for veal with less than 43  square feet 
of usable floor space per calf;  or 
(3) After December 3 1,  2021, confining a breeding pig with less than 24 square feet of 
usable floor space per pig; or 
(4) After December 31, 2019, confining an egg-laying hen with less than  144 square 
inches of usable floor space per hen; or 
(5) After December 31, 2021, confining an egg-laying hen with less than the amount of 
usable floor space per hen required by the 2017 edition of the United Egg Producers' 
Animal Husbandry Guidelines for U.S . Egg-Laying Flocks: Guidelines for Cage-Free 
Housing, or in an enclosure other than a cage-free housing system. 

means any cage, crate, or other a structure (including what is c01mnonly 

(b)(f)  "Covered animal" means any pig during pregnancy, calf raised for veal, breeding pig, or 
egg-laying hen who is kept on a farm. 
(c)(g) "Egg-laying hen" means any female domesticated chicken, turkey, duck, goose, or guinea 
fowl kept for the purpose of egg production. 
(d)(h) "Enclosure" 
described as  a "gestation crate" for pigs; a "veal crate" for calves; or a "battey   cage" for egg 
laying hens) used to  confine a covered animal or animals. 
(e)(i) "Farm"  means the land, building, supp01t facilities,  and other equipment that are wholly or 
pa1tially used for the c01mnercial production of animals or animal products used for food or 
fiber;  and does not include live animal markets 
establishments at which mandato1y inspection is 
provided under the Federal Meat Inspection Act, or official plants at which mandat01y inspection 
is maintained under the Federal Egg Products Inspection Act. 
(j) "Farm  owner or operator" means any person who owns or controls the operations of a farm. 
(f).(k) "Fully  extending his or her the animal 's limbs" means fully extending all limbs without 
touching the side of an enclosure, including, in the case of egg  laying hens, fully spreading both 
wings without touching the side of an enclosure or other egg laying hens or another animal. 
(1)  "Liquid eggs" means eggs of an egg-laying hen broken from the shells, intended for human 
food,  with the yolks and whites in their natural prop01tions, or with the yolks and whites 
separated, mixed, or mixed and strained. Liquid eggs do  not include combination food products 
(including pancake mixes, cake mixes, cookies, pizzas, cookie dough,  ice cream, or similar 
processed or prepared food products) that are comprised of more than liquid eggs, sugar, salt, 
water, seasoning, coloring, flavoring, preservatives, stabilizers, and similar food  additives. 
(g)(m)  "Person" means any individual, firm,partnership, joint venture, association, limited 
liability company, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, or syndicate. 

2 


around freely" means turning in a complete circle without any impediment, 


(h)  "Pig during pregnancy" means any pregnant pig of the porcine species kept for the primary 

purpose of breeding. (n) "Pork meat" means meat, as defined in 3 CCR 900 as of August 2017, of 

a pig of the porcine species, intended for use as human food. 

(o) "Sale" means a conunercial sale by a business that sells any item covered by this chapter, but 

does not include any sale undertaken at an establishment at which mandat01y inspection is 

provided under the Federal Meat Inspection Act, or any sale undertaken at an official plant at 

which mandatory inspection is maintained under the Federal Egg Products Inspection Act.  For 

purposes  of this section, a sale shall be deemed to  occur at the location where the buyer takes 

physical possession of an item covered by section 25990 of this chapter. 

(p) "Shell egg" means a whole egg of an egg-laying hen in its shell fo1111,  intended for use as 

human food. 

(i).(g) "Turning 
including a tether, and without touching the side of an enclosure or another animal. 

(r) "Uncooked" means requiring cooking prior to human consumption. 

(s) "Usable floor space" means the total square footage of floor space provided to each covered 

animal, as calculated by dividing the total square footage of floor space provided to the animals 

in an enclosure by the number of animals in that enclosure. In the case of egg-laying hens, 

"usable floor space" shall include both ground space and elevated level flat platforms upon 

which hens can roost, but shall not include perches or ramps. 

(t) "Veal meat" means meat, as defined in 3 CCR 900 as of August 2017, of a calf raised for veal 

intended for use as  human food. 

(u) "Whole pork meat" means any uncooked cut of pork (including bacon, ham, chop, ribs, 

riblet, loin, shank, leg, roast, brisket, steak, sirloin or cutlet) that is comprised entirely of pork 

meat, except for seasoning, curing agents, coloring, flavoring, preservatives and similar meat 

additives. Whole pork meat does not include combination food products (including soups, 

sandwiches, pizzas, hot dogs, or similar processed or prepared food products) that are comprised 

of more than pork meat, seasoning, curing agents, coloring, flavoring,  preservatives, and similar 

meat additives. 

(v) "Whole veal meat" means any uncooked cut of veal (including chop, ribs, riblet,  loin, shank 

leg, roast, brisket, steak, sirloin or cutlet) that is comprised entirely of veal meat,  except for 

seasoning, curing agents, coloring, flavoring, preservatives, and similar meat additives.  Whole 

veal meat does not include combination food  products (including soups, sandwiches, pizzas, hot 

dogs, or similar processed or prepared food products) that are comprised of more than veal meat, 

seasoning, curing agents, coloring, flavoring, preservatives and similar meat additives. 


SECTION 5.  SECTION 25992 OF THE CALIFORNIA HEALTH  AND SAFETY CODE IS  HEREBY 
AMENDED TO  READ : 

This chapter shall not apply: 
(a) During scientific or agriculturalmedical research. 
(b) During examination, testing, individual treatment or operation for veterinary purposes. 
(c)  During transpo1tation. 
(d) During rodeo exhibitions, state or county fair exhibitions, 4-H programs, and similar 
exhibitions. 
(e) During the slaughter of a covered animal in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6 
(commencing with Section 19501) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Food and Agricultural Code, 

3 

relating to  humane methods of slaughter, and other applicable law and regulations. 
(f) To a breeding pig during the seven  day  five (5) day period prior to the breeding pig's 
expected date of giving birth, and any day that the breeding pig is  nursing piglets. 
(g) During tempora1y periods for animal  husbandry  purp,oses for no more than six (6) hours in 
any twenty-four (24) hour period, aand nomore than twenty-four (24) hours total in any thi1ty 
(30) day period. 

. 

-

. 

SECTION 6.  SECTION  25993 OF THE  CALIFORNIA HEALTH AND  SAFETY CODE  IS  HEREBY 
AMENDED TO  READ: 

(a) The California Department of Food and Agriculture and the California Depa1tment of Public 
Health shall jointly promulgate rnles and regulations for the implementation of this Act by 
September 1, 2019. 
(b)Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and 
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1 ,000) 
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 180 days or by both such fine 
and imprisonment.  In addition, a violation of section 25990(b) of this chapter constitutes "unfair 
competition" as  defined in Section 17200 of the Business and Professions Code and is 
punishable as prescribed in Chapter 5 (conunencing with section 17200) of Part 2 of Division 7 
of the Business and Professions Code. 
(c) The provisions of this chapter relating to crnel confinement of covered animals and sale of 
products shall supersede any conflicting regulations, including conflicting regulations pursuant 
to the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 2,  Subdivision 6,  Chapter 6. 

SECTION 7.  SECTION  25993 .1 IS  HEREBY  ADDED TO TH ECALIFORNIA HEALTH  AND SAFETY COD E 
TO  READ : 

It shall be a defense to any action to enforce section 25990(b) of this chapter that a business 
owner or operator relied in good faith upon a written ce1tification by the supplier that the whole 
veal meat, whole pork meat, shell eggs,  or liquid eggs at issue was not derived from a covered 
animal who was confined in a cruel manner, or from the immediate offspring of a breeding pig 
who was confined in a crnel manner. 

SECTION 8. This Act shall be amended only by a statute approved by a vote of four fifths of the 
members of both houses of the Legislature. Any amendment of this Act shall be consistent with 
and fmther the purposes of this Act. 

SECTION 9.  If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to  any person or 
circumstances, is  held invalid or unconstitutional, that invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not 
affect other provisions or applications of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid or 
unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable. 

4 

