Ms. Ashely Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, California 95814-2919 

August 28, 2017 

Re:  amendment to proposed initiative 

1  7  - 0  0  1  7 Arndt. #  1 

RECEIVED 

AUG  2 9 2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Pursuant to Article I,  Section 9002(b) of the Elections Code, this letter respectfully requests that 
the Attorney General's Initiative Coordinator accept the enclosed amendment to the previously 
proposed initiative measure:  "The California Call for a Constitutional Convention" (17-0017).  The 
amendment amends the Purpose and Intent from an Initiative for a Constitutional Amendment to 
an Initiative Statute and I request that the Attorney General's Office prepare a circulating title and 
summary for initiative measure  17-0017, as  amended. 

In accordance with the provisions of the Elections Code, I, Clare Hedin, the sole proponent of 
ballot measure 17-0017, hereby submit this signed request. Enclosed is a copy of the ballot 
measure as it reads with the amendment, which is reasonably germane to the theme, purpose, and 
subject of initiative measure 17-0017 as originally proposed on August 17, 2017. 

Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter. 

Faithfully, 

Clare Hedin 

The California Constitutional Convention Initiative Team 
team@calconcon.com 
https://calconcon.com 

1 7  - 0  0  1  7 Arndt. #  1 

SECTION 1. TITLE: CALIFORNIA CALLS FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 
("CAL CON CON") 

This measure shall be known as the California Calls for a Constitutional Convention ("Cal Con 
Con"). 

SECTION 2. Findings and Declarations: 

The current relationship between the Federal Government of The United States of America and 
California prevents California, and other states, from taking ownership over their future and must 
be revised. 

1. 	 Given that "California is - and must always be - a refuge ofjustice and opportunity for 

people of all ages, backgrounds and aspirations - regardless of how you look, where you 
live, what language you speak, or who you love;" 

2. 	 Given that the world has changed dramatically since 1787, and over the next Century 

California will continue to invent the future, be it in Entertainment, IT, Medical 
discoveries, Environmental Protection, Global Climate Disaster Mitigation, or Civil Rights 
& Liberties; 

3. 	 Given that a Californian's vote has one seventieth the weight of a citizen of Wyoming in 

the US Senate and has become functionally irrelevant in presidential elections; 

4. 	 Given that California receives approximately seventy-five cents in federal funding back for 

every dollar Californians pay to the federal government in taxes, as compared to the USA 
States average federal return in funding from taxes of $1.22/dollar; 

5. 	 Given that the US federal  government has seen increasing gridlock and citizens across the 

country feel poorly represented by the federal government; 

6. 	 Given that California's government and people increasingly want to chart their own path 

on issues ranging from - but not limited to - immigration, civil representation and 
environmental protection and, given the US Constitution expressly designates states as 
sovereign entities; 

7. 	 Given that Article V of the Constitution of the United States authorizes a process to 

propose amendments to the United States Constitution through a Convention of the States; 

8. 	 Given that the authors of the original 1787 Constitution expressly included an article five 

constitutional convention as a vehicle for state governments to rein in the potential for 
federal tyranny and ensure America never again had a king; 

9. 	 Given that the tenth Amendment of the US  Constitution reserves all powers not expressly 

enumerated to the federal government to the states; 

10.  Given that throughout our nation's history, there have been over 700 applications from 

state governments to call an article five constitutional convention including applications 
from all fifty states; 

11.  Given that the Congress has failed to act despite the express constitutional direction of 

Article Five of the US  Constitution; 

12. Given that the 1787 constitutional convention was only retroactively endorsed by the 

Congress under the previous Articles of Confederation; 

13.  Given that California has successfully implemented the principle of subsidiarity, devolving 

power more locally under the leadership of Governor Edmund G.  Brown; 

14.  Given that Californians have expressed their interest in constitutional reform to address the 

influx of money in politics in the wake of Citizens United vs.  FEC; 

15.  Given that California has a deep commitment to open and pluralistic values protecting the 
civil rights of all Californians as articulated in Finding #1  above quoting from California's 
state legislative leaders; 

16. Given that California Governor Jerry Brown has successfully led California to achieve 

greater economic growth than the nation as  a whole since the great depression; 

17.  Given further that under Governor Brown's leadership, California: 

1. 	 "Increased - by tens of billions - support for our public schools and universities. 
2. 	 Provided health insurance to over five  million more Californians. 
3. 	 Raised the minimum wage. 
4. 	 Reduced prison overcrowding and reformed our system of crime and punishment. 
5. 	 Made California a world leader in the fight against climate change. 
6. 	 Passed a water bond. 
7. 	 Built up a rainy day fund. 
8. 	 And closed a huge $27 billion deficit." 

18. Given that in addition to these successes, Governor Brown has served as both California' s 

youngest and oldest governor, unique among all current sitting governors; 

19. Given that California has a long tradition of leading America - and indeed the world - in 

social, political, environmental and technological advancement & protection; 

20.  Given that Californian's believe in the equality and inherent dignity of all persons; 
21 . Given that California's participation in an article five constitutional convention is  an 

excellent opportunity to advance specific issues dear to the hearts of many Californians, 
including, but not limited to: 

1. 	 Protecting citizens from discrimination, harm or unfair treatment, from individuals 

or groups. 

2. 	 Our state government unwaveringly protecting civilians rights to freedom of 

expression and assembly as well as the equality of opportunity for all Californians. 

3. 	 Limiting corporate personhood for purposes of campaign finance and political 

speech; 

4. 	 Requiring women, LGBTQ and all people - regardless of ethnicity, race, national 

origin, gender - to receive equal pay for equal work; 

5. 	 Requiring the federal government to allocate funding to the states according to the 

amount each respective state paid in federal taxes; 

6. 	 Enabling CA to negotiate binding agreements with other nations, subnational 

states, and nongovernmental organizations to limit greenhouse gas emissions and 
other environmentally threatening business practices; 

7. 	 Enabling CA to negotiate binding agreements with concerned and responding 

governments, and other partners, dedicated to mitigating the impacts of worldwide 
refugees, loss of lifestyles and land, due to impacts of Climate Change. 

8. 	 Should it be deemed necessary by the majority CA population, in order to defend 

California's progressive values, civic values and environmental concerns, we must 
create a clear and reasonable path for individual States to become independent, so 
that CA can secede, if they so choose; 

22.  Given that California was seized undemocratically and annexed by the US in 1846 in an 

act of naked imperial aggression; 

23.  We believe that justice for all requires constant vigilance and a thorough examination of 

laws and governmental actions that disproportionately impact diverse segments of society. 
These beliefs depend on resolutely defending these Californian values, which support 
every individual's hopes and dreams for the future; 

24. California hereby resolves to call a constitutional convention under Article Five of the US 
Constitution to advance the cause of California and the freedom of all American states to 
take ownership of their future. 

SECTION 3. Purpose and Intent 

Title 24 is  added to the Government code as follows : 

Title 24 CALIFORNIA CALLS FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION. 

The Legislature of the State of California, speaking on behalf of the people of the State of 
California, will apply to the United States Congress to call a constitutional convention pursuant to 
Article V of the United States Constitution for the purpose of proposing amendments to the United 
States Constitution that would; 

1. 	 Civil Rights: 

1.  Regardless of national origin, religion, age, gender, sexual orientation or race: 

1. 	 Protect all natural persons from discrimination, harm, or unfair treatment from 

individual, corporate or organizational persecution; 

2. 	 Protect the people's right to experience a life of freedom and self­

determination, without violence, pollution or servitude. 

3. 	 Protect the people's right to live in full health and in a fully healthy Natural 

environment. 

4. 	 Protect the people's right to sovereignty over our bodies, including but not 

limited to women, and all choices that affect our body's health and wellness, as 
determined by us, regardless of gender, age, religion, national origin, ethnicity, 
sexual orientation or race. 

5. 	 Protect the people's right to privacy. 
6. 	 Protect all people's right to be joined in a mutually consenting marriage, no 

matter the gender or sexuality of each party. 

7. 	 Abolish Corporate personhood for purposes of campaign finance and political 

speech; 

8. 	 Provide free, reliable and safe Universal healthcare for all citizens, regardless 

of medical history. 

9. 	 Provide free,  high quality, Universal education. 
10.  Abolish Electoral College; 

1. 	 Failing this, operate on proportional representation within Electoral 

college so that each State has a valid, proportional and vital voice. 

2. 	 Civil Community Rights: 

1. 	 Declare that we the people have sovereignty and self-determination over our 

liberty, welfare, domestic tranquility and local economic development, above and 
beyond any powers of those elected officials in service of the body politic: 
1. 	 Local community governance is the primary authority on the best use of, and 

protection of, their own natural resources for economic development, for 

Nature's needs to thrive, and for local community to thrive; all development 
needs to be evaluated by each local community for its acceptable impact on 
their environment so as  to protect Nature's ability to be naturally regenerative, 
and remain unpolluted and un-degraded. All local development needs to 
progress in agreement between local community, local government and, where 
necessary, state government. 
Including, but not limited to, elected officials evaluating proposed individual, 
organizational or business land and natural resource use that can and may 
affect each local community: it is the local community's right to deny or adjust 
local development, protect liberty, welfare and domestic tranquillity, 
peaceably, as pertains to humanity, health, environment's health, the future, 
dignity and all natural person's inalienable freedoms and rights. 

2. 	

3. 	 Local communities' health and wellbeing are above and beyond any 

profiteering or use of natural resources, habitats, and ecosystems by private or 
government groups and are based on the requirements and needs, as identified 
by each affected community. 

4. 	 Declare that State, Local & Federal governments exist to protect and serve all 

natural persons, Nature and all ecosystems rights to long, healthy, engaged 
natural lives, of absolute personal freedom. 

3. 	 Wages: 

1. 	 All things being equal, require all people of equal skill to receive equal pay for 

equal work, regardless of gender, age, religion, national origin, ethnicity, 
sexual orientation or race. 

2. 	 Without question, women receive equal pay to men doing the same job. 
3. 	 Require each American state to have a minimum wage that provides for a 

living wage along accordance with each state's actual cost of living regardless 
of gender, age, religion, national origin, ethnicity, sexual orientation or race; 

4. 	 Federal taxes: 

1. 	 Modify Federal tax law to render Federal taxes negotiable: 

1. 	 State tax becomes primary. 
2. 	 Federal tax secondary and negotiable, based on the needs of each State - to be 

determined by each State and the voters. 

3. 	 State government negotiates Federal Taxes on its voters, and their respective 
communities, behalf to fairly and equally represent voters' values and needs, 
and those of their respective natural environments. 

5. 	 Protecting the dignity of all life: 

1. 	 Nature's Rights: 

1. 	 Recognize, respect and protect the natural environment as a sovereign, living, 
being with inalienable rights, that derive from existence, to continue to exist, 
thrive, and evolve naturally; uncompromised by pollution, degradation, 
damage or destruction. Nature shall include all land, water, air, plant, animal, 
wildlife, wilderness, all living beings and naturally occurring ecosystems as 
they exist as independent species and as interdependent groups and habitats 
that support the essential well-being and workings of all life. 

2. 	 Make it irrevocable law that no individual, business entity, government or 

organization shall pollute, degrade or over-use Nature. 

1. 	 Pollution to be defined as interfering with ecosystems' and human 

systems' right and ability to flourish in their own local environment, 

including loss of lifestyles and loss, delay or damage to systemic 
integrity. 

2. 	 Degrading to be defined as negatively affecting quality of life and 

ability to regenerate or continue to identify as a species, an ecosystem 
or habitat. 

3. 	 Overuse to be defined as  interfering with Nature's ability to easily 

regenerate itself and to thrive in her own naturally occurring cycles. 

4. 	 Reduce any and all degrading or harmful emissions or enviromnentally 
damaging behaviours towards Nature or humans to 'levels required by 
local and extended c01mnunities and municipalities, should those 
extended communities also be affected' in order to secure our collective 
future into a globally safe, healthy, liveable and sustainable planet, with 
a healthy and peaceful quality of life, for all living beings. 

3. 	 Declare that where pollution, degradation or over-use has occurred, Nature has 

the right to restoration. 

2. 	

1. 	 This integral restoration is independent of the obligation on natural and 
juridical persons or the State to indemnify the people and the collectives 
that depend on the natural systems. 
In the cases of severe or permanent environmental impact, including 
those caused by the exploitation of non-renewable natural resources, the 
State - in consultation and agreement with local communities, local 
leaders and affected municipalities - will establish the most efficient 
mechanisms for the restoration, and will adopt the adequate measures to 
eliminate or mitigate the harmful enviromnental consequences. 

3. 	 The State, in consultation and agreement with local communities, local 

leaders and affected municipalities, will apply precaution and restriction 
measures in all the activities that can lead to the extinction of species, 
the destruction of the ecosystems or the permanent alteration of the 
natural cycles. 

4. 	 Declare that Nature is a freely living being with inalienable rights, and that no 
individual, business entity, government, "owner" or organization shall inflict 
violence or servitude on her. 

5. 	 Declare that Nature maintains the absolute and inherent right to a healthy, 

peaceful, regenerative, existence.  To fulfil this right; 

1. 	 We the people, in our communities are empowered and protected by 

sovereign local law from pre-emption from private authorities, and from 
any non-disclosures or secret acts by Local, State and Federal 
representatives, to ensure and protect Nature's rights to clean and 
healthy water, soil and air as a source of life and to ensure that Natural 
systems can continue to propagate themselves naturally, sustainably and 
for the future of all organic life, without interruption, and that this 
authority never be limited, pre-empted. 

6. 	 Nature is not mere property and is safe from violence and servitude. 
7. 	 Declare that every natural person shall have recourse to the law for all 
violations of this article, with damages recurring in full to the injured 
enviromnental system to ensure its prompt restoration. The natural 
environment shall not be deprived of its rights. 

8. 	 The State will motivate natural and juridical persons as well as  groups and 

organizations to protect nature; it will promote respect towards all the elements 
that form a living, healthy, fully functioning ecosystem. 

2. 	 Human Community Rights of Nature: 

1. 	 Recognize that humans are an inseparable part of Nature - all that affects 

Nature affects humans and all living beings. 

2. 	 Recognize human's paramount rights to a clean, healthy planet. 
3. 	 Recognize that Nature's health is  inextricably tied to human health and must, 
therefore, be maintained as a priority, above business, government or private 
interests, that can be deemed to threaten said health and said entitlement to 
health. 

4. 	 Recognize that, in order to protect human quality of life and a peaceful 

coexistence, each community must retain unfettered authority through local 
law-making to protect and sustain a clean, healthy and abundant natural 
environment. 

5. 	 Recognize and protects individual and community needs for a sustainable and 

healthy quality of life and that each community is able to maintain access to 
clean water, air, food and wilderness without burden. 

6. 	 Recognize these needs and rights and that all economic, business, government 

or individual activity is subject to prohibition by the community majority in 
which the activity is proposed. 

7. 	 Recognize that no business practice is more important than respecting and 

protecting Nature's and the community's inherent needs for a clean and healthy 
lifestyle and unintem1pted life cycles.  Therefore, adjusting all economic and 
social practices to protect Nature's rights to health and needs to regenerate in 
her own Natural cycles. 

8. 	 Recognize that all organic and synthetic waste product creation must be 

designed and manufactured so that it can be reintegrated back into the cycle of 
life without harm to the Natural environment or to human environments, to 
secure the future of all natural life on the planet. 

9. 	 Work with local communities to ensure that no local or foreign business or 

government negatively affects the quality of life in their natural enviromnent. 

3. 	 Nature & Community's health abroad: 

1. 	 Recognize that USA businesses working abroad are standard bearers for 

highest USA environmental and human ethical standards. 

1. 	 USA businesses, private authority's, organizations and individuals 

operate in observance of highest environmental standards on foreign 
lands or waters; i.e. in accordance with all natural persons and all natural 
systems' right to a healthy and regenerative life, and in service of foreign 
locally based natural person's inalienable rights to rely on their local 
environment for their sustenance and health, according to the highest 
global and local environmental standards, whichever assures highest 
quality of life for all local living inhabitants, if higher than USA 
standards. 

1. 	 Failure to do the above renders any offending USA private 

authority, business, individual or organization subject to USA 
judiciary process. 

2. 	 Create an international coalition to mitigate the impacts of industrialization on 

all people's lifestyles, access to natural resources, access to healthy 
environment and needs to adopt new infrastructures and income-bearing 
opportunities in the face of climate crisis loss due to, but not limited to; rising 
sea levels, loss of air quality, soil degradation, loss of forests, mountain 
degradation, land, sea and air pollution, loss of land mass, loss of freshwater. 

4. 	 Clean Energy Commitment: 

1. 	 State and Federal Governments to convert from extraction fuel to sustainable 
clean energy sources for business practice, organizational and residential use, 
in accordance with the most rigorous global scientific standards necessary to 
ensure Planetary, Ecosystem and Human health. 

6. 	 State Independence: 

1. 	 Create a clear and reasonable path for States to achieve complete independence 

from the United States should any state so chose. 

The People of the State of California hereby instruct their state elected officials to communicate 
with and support any other American state that is interested in calling a constitutional convention 
regardless of that American states' reasons for calling for an Article V Constitutional Convention, 
with the intent to get enough American states to call for an Article V Constitutional Convention so 
that it happens. 

SECTION 4. Severability 

If any provision of this measure, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and 
effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure are severable. 

SECTION 5.  Proponent Standing 

Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, if the state, government agency, or any of its officials 
fail to defend the constitutionality of this measure, following its approval by the voters, any other 
government employer, the proponent, or in his or her absence, any citizen ofthis state shall have 
the authority to intervene in any court action challenging the constitutionality of this measure for 
the purpose of defending its constitutionality, whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, or on 
discretionary review by the Supreme Court of California or the Supreme Court of the United 
States.  The fees  and costs of defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated to the 
Attorney General, which shall be satisfied promptly. 

