Gerald  H.  Mera!, Ph.D. 

PO  1103 Inverness, Ca  94937 

ierrymeral@gmail.com 

415-717-8412 

1 7  - 0  0  1 0  Arndt#  / 

RECEIVED

AUG  1 1 2017

INIDATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

August 11, 2017 

Attorney General Xavier Becerra 

Attention: Ashley Johansson, initiative coordinator 

1300 I Street, 17th floor, Sacramento, Ca  95814 

Dear Attorney General Becerra: 

Enclosed are amendments to our water bond initiative, 17-0010.  Please  prepare a title and summary 
based on this amended initiative.  A copy in  underline and  strikeout is provided, as well as a clean copy. 

Please  let me know if you have any questions. 


Sincerely 


Gerald H.  Mera! 


Cc:  Legislative analyst 

1 7  - 0  0  1 0  Arndt.#  I 

THE  PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF  CALIFORNIA DO  ENACT AS FOLLOWS: 

SECTION  1. 

Division 38 (commencing with Section 86000) is  added to the Water Code, to read: 

DIVISION  38. State water supply infrastructure, water conveyance, ecosystem and watershed  protection 
and  restoration, and drinking water protection act of 2018. 

CHAPTER  1. Short Title. 

86000. This division shall  be  known and  may be  cited as  the Water Supply and  Water Quality Act of 2018. 

CHAPTER  2. Findings and Declarations. 

86001. The  people find and declare the following: 

(a)  In our frequently very dry state, our high-tech, agricultural and  urbanized economy relies on an 
uninterrupted and  high-quality water supply. By making water use more efficient, reducing the demand 
for water, providing new and  diverse water supplies, improving the quality of our source watersheds, and 
protecting key environmental uses of water, this measure will assure that the economic and 
environmental engines of California are  not derailed by a shortage of water. 

(b) California's recent historic drought raises serious questions about the Jong-term  reliability of our 
current water supplies. The drought underscores the need to use our existing water supplies more 
efficiently, increase investments in  our water infrastructure, and more effectively integrate our water 
system from the headwaters to the end  user. 

(c)  California's water situation requires implementation of the Governor's Water Action  Plan to provide 
for the water needs ofpeople, agriculture and the environment. This division will help provide a more 
reliable water supply by reducing waste, increasing the amount of water available to meet our needs, and 
improving water quality. This division also  provides additional protection for our communities from 
floods. 

(d) This division will implement cost effective methods of water development and conservation to meet 
California's present and future water needs in a changing climate, including capture of urban drainage 
and stormwater runoff, groundwater and  brackish water desalting, groundwater storage, water recycling, 
waterconservation, and watershed  management, restoration, enhancement and protection. 

(e)  Many of the water supply and  water quality investments provided by this division will be matched by 
agencies and grant recipients, more than doubling the effectiveness of the funding provided. 

(f) Agencies implementing this division will give high  priority to cost-effective projects, and to the most 
durable and  most environmentally beneficial projects. Funding will go to projects that contribute to 
implementation of the Governor's Water Action Plan, the goal of which  is to increase the resiliency of the 
California water system and the ability of California communities to cope with drought conditions. 

1 

(g)  Every Californian  has a right to safe, clean, affordable, and  accessible drinking water. By  complying 
with Section 106.3, agencies providing funds for safe drinking water pursuant to this division will help 
achieve the intent of that Section. 

(h) This division provides a fair and  reasonable distribution of funds directly and  indirectly benefitting 
every region  of the state. 

(i) This division provides short and  long-term cost-effective actions to address the water shortages caused 
by the recent drought, and will help prepare local communities for future droughts. Droughts reduce 
water supplies for people, agriculture and the environment. This division will help meet the water needs 
of people, agriculture, and the environment and  make California  more resilient in the face of a changing 
climate. 

(j)  By improving the health and water productivity of watersheds, communities will become more self­
reliant with respect to water supply, and  local environmental quality will be increased. 

(k)  By removing invasive plants such as yellow starthistle, giant reed  (Arundo donax)  and tam a risk, water 
supply will be increased and  habitat for fish and wildlife will be improved. 

(I)  Flooding can  devastate communities and  infrastructure. We can make better use  of floodwaters by 
capturing waters and putting them to use  in  our communities, on our farms, and  by recharging 
groundwater basins.  By providing funds to intelligently manage our watersheds and floodplains, this 
division will also  help avoid flood damage, improve fish  and wildlife habitat, remove  pollutants from our 
water supply, enhance groundwater, remediate aquifers and  improve the environment.  Better floodplain 
management may allow improved operation of upstream reservoirs for water supply purposes. 

(m) Severe fire conditions can  lead to significant erosion, reduced  water quality and  impacts on water 
infrastructure. This division provides funding to manage forests and  watersheds to reduce fire danger, 
mitigate the effects of wildfires on water supply and quality, and  enhance water supplies. 

(n) This division funds the following programs, which respond to human and  environmental water needs 
in California: 

(1)  Improvement of water supply and  water quality utilizing cost effective methods, including 

water conservation, desalting of groundwater and  other inland saline water, stormwater management, 
wastewater recycling, and similar water management measures. 

(2)  Better management of forest and  rangeland watersheds, such  as through the Sierra  Nevada 

Watershed Improvement Program to improve the pattern, quantity and  quality of water runoff and 
groundwater recharge. Improving soil  health  improves the ability of the ground to better contain 
groundwater and  moderate the rate of water runoff. 

(3)  Better groundwater management, including faster implementation of the Sustainable 

Groundwater Management Act, and  better recognition of the connection between surface and 
groundwater. 

(4)  Provision of water for fish and  wildlife, including restoration of the Pacific Flyway and 

management of habitat in a dynamic way to respond to changing environmental conditions. 

2 

(5)  Increased capacity to convey water resulting in greater groundwater recharge and  improved 

conveyance and  utilization of floodwaters for use in  drought years. 

(o) The State Water Resources Control  Board, the  Department of Fish  and Wildlife, and  many other 
agencies have recognized that providing funding for fish  habitat enhancement is vital to restoring native 
California fish  populations, and that relying solely on flow to restore those populations will not be 
sufficient. Providing funding for fish  habitat enhancement is  a vital complement to reasonable flows to 
protect fish. 

(p) California has lost ninety-five percent (95%) of its historical wetlands. These wetlands provide food, 
water and cover for migratory and  other birds, fish,  mammals, reptiles, amphibians and  a vast number of 
plant species.  Many species may become endangered or threatened without wetlands and  many more 
survive only due to wetlands available today. This division combines work to sustain and  protect current 
wetlands with the potential to increase  wetlands in California to support a thriving flora and fauna. 

(q) The implementation of this division will result in cost savings to local governments immediately by 
substantially more than one  billion dollars, and  reduce  local government operating costs by hundreds of 
millions of dollars per year. This division will provide funding that displaces local government funding, 
resulting in the implementation of projects in the following areas. These  projects would  have eventually 
been implemented by local government. 

(1) Safe  Drinking Water. State direct and  matching funds will reduce the cost to local government 
of implementing drinking water and  wastewater treatment systems, and to some extent the operation of 
those systems. 

(2)  Wastewater recycling. State funds will reduce the cost of these plants, reducing the capital 

cost of the projects for local governments.  By  reducing local government capital costs, the cost of water 
from these plants will also be  reduced.  Implementation of wastewater recycling plants will defer the need 
for more expensive alternative sources of water supply, thus further reducing local capital and  operating 
costs. 

(3) Groundwater desalting. State funds will reduce the cost of these plants, reducing the capital 
cost of the projects for local governments. By reducing local government capital costs, the cost of water 
from these plants will also be  reduced.  Implementation of groundwater desalting plants will defer the 
need for more expensive alternative sources of water supply, thus further reducing local capital and 
operating costs. 

(4)  Water Conservation. State funds will reduce the cost of these projects, reducing costs to local 

government. More importantly, reduced  water demand  resulting from these projects will reduce 
operating costs, and will temporarily or permanently defer the construction and  operating costs of more 
expensive capital outlay projects needed to provide new water. 

(5)  Repairing flood control reservoirs. State funds will reduce the costs of these  projects for local 

government. 

(6) San  Francisco Bay Restoration Authority funds. State investment in wetlands projects 

providing flood  protection around San  Francisco  Bay will reduce flood  risk associated with climate change. 
This will reduce the cost of other flood control measures, and more importantly will reduce flood damage 
which often results in tremendous costs to local government for facility repair. 

3 

(7) Stormwater funding.  Regulations imposed by the State Water Resources Control Board and 

various regional water quality control boards will result in the construction of various capital outlay 
projects costing billions of dollars.  Providing funds through this measure will reduce the cost of these 
projects to local government. 

(8)  Fisheries restoration. This division provides hundreds of millions of dollars for fisheries 

restoration.  Local and  regional water agencies are voluntarily undertaking many of these projects. By 
providing state funds, this division will reduce local costs.  In addition, the resulting increase in fish 
populations will make it possible to improve local water supplies, avoiding local government costs to 
provide replacement water supplies costing hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars. 

(9)  Bay Area  Regional  Reliability. Bay Area water districts are  undertaking extensive 

improvements in their water distribution systems to interconnect their water supplies for greater drought 
water supply reliability and other benefits.  By providing funds for this program, this division will reduce 
their costs by two hundred and  fifty million dollars ($250,000,000). 

(10) Friant Kern Canal  Repair. Groundwater overdraft has caused subsidence of the Friant Kern 
Canal. State funds to repair the canal  will reduce the cost of repairing the canal to local water districts. 
Avoiding the cost to finance this project will also save tens of millions of dollars per year in interest costs 
which would have to be  paid by these districts. 

(11) Oroville Dam  Repair. Although the costs of repairing Oroville Dam should  be covered by the 

federal government either through the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Corps of 
Engineers, the federal government may not fulfill this obligation. If the State Water Resources 
Development System contractors, all  local agencies, are forced to cover all or part of these costs, this 
division will reduce their costs by two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000}. Interest costs would also 
be  reduced. 

(r) Substantial funds remain to be  allocated to storage projects pursuant to Division 26.7.  For this reason, 
and so  as not to interfere with the work of the California Water Commission in  awarding these funds, this 
measure does not include funding for the construction of specific storage projects. 

CHAPTER 3. Definitions. 

86002. Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section govern the 
construction of this division, as follows: 

(a)  "Conservation" means rehabilitation, stabilization, restoration, reduced  water use, development, and 
reconstruction, or any combination of those activities. 

(b)  "Conservation actions on  private lands" means projects implemented with willing landowners that 
involve the adaptive and flexible management of natural resources in  response to changing conditions and 
threats to habitat and wildlife. These  investments and actions are specifically designed to create habitat 
conditions on  private lands which, when managed dynamically over time, contribute to the long-term 
health and  resiliency of vital ecosystems and enhance wildlife populations. 

(c) "Delta" means the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta as defined in Section 12220. 

(d)  "Department" means the  Department of Water Resources. 

4 

(e)  "Desalination" means removing salt and other contaminants from polluted groundwater or other 
inland sources of water containing salts, including brackish water. 

(f)  "Disadvantaged community" has the meaning set forth in subdivision (a)  of Section 79505.5, as it may 
be amended. 

(g)  "Economically distressed area"  has the meaning set forth in  subdivision  (k) of Section 79702, as it may 
be amended. 

(h)  "Finance committee" means the Water Supply Reliability and Drought Protection Finance Committee 
created by Section 86182. 

(i)  "Fund" means the Water Supply Reliability and  Drought Protection Fund of 2018 created by Section 
86169. 

(j) "Groundwater sustainability agency" means an  agency defined in subdivision (j) of Section 10721. 

(k) "Integrated Regional Water Management Plan" means a comprehensive  plan for a defined geographic 
area that meets the requirements of Part 2.2  (commencing with Section 10530) of Division 6,  as that part 
may be amended. 

(I) "Invasive plant" means a terrestrial or aquatic plant not native to California of no or negligible 
agricultural value which does any of the following: displaces native plants, threatens native plant 
biodiversity, harms agricultural or rangeland productivity, degrades wildlife habitat, contributes to fire 
hazard, or uses more water than the plants it displaces. 

(m) "Multi-benefit project" means a project that serves more than one purpose,  including but not limited 
to flood  management, water supply, water quality improvement, environmental enhancement, 
recreation, energy conservation, reduction of emission of climate-changing gases, and fish and wildlife 
improvement. 

(n) "Nonprofit organization" means an organization qualified to do business in California and  exempt 
under Section 501(c)(3) or Section 501(c)(6) of Title 26 of the United States Code, to the extent permitted 
by state and federal law. 

(o) "Protection" means those actions necessary to prevent harm or damage to persons,  property or 
natural resources or those actions necessary to allow the continued use and  enjoyment of property or 
natural resources and includes acquisition, development, restoration, conservation,  preservation and 
interpretation as  interpretation is  defined in subdivision (i) of Section 75005 of the Public Resources Code. 

(p)  "Public agency" means a state agency or department, special district, joint powers authority, city, 
county, city and county, or other political subdivision of the state. 

(q)  "Public water systems" are  defined in subdivision (h)  of section 116275 of the Health and  Safety Code 
and  means regional,  municipal, and  district urban water suppliers, including privately owned water 
suppliers as defined in  Part 2.6, Section 10617 of the Water Code  Division 6. 

(r)  "Restoration" means the improvement of physical structures or facilities and, in the case  of natural 
systems and  landscape features, includes but is not limited to projects that improve physical and 

5 

ecological processes, including but not limited to erosion control; sediment management; the control and 
elimination of invasive species;  prescribed  burning; fuel hazard  reduction; fencing out threats to existing 
or restored natural resources; meadow, wetland,  riparian,  and stream restoration; and  other plant and 
wildlife habitat improvement to increase the natural system value of the property. Restoration projects 
shall include the planning, monitoring and  reporting necessary to ensure successful implementation of 
the project objectives. 

(s)  "Severely disadvantaged community" means a community with a median household income of less 
than 60 percent (60%)  of the statewide median household income. 

(t) "Sierra  Nevada Watershed Improvement Program" is a coordinated, integrated, collaborative program 
to restore the health of California's primary watershed by increasing the pace and scale of forest 
restoration in order to maintain the important benefits that the Sierra Nevada region provides. 

(u)  "State board" means the State Water Resources Control Board. 

(v) "State General Obligation Bond  Law" means the State General Obligation Bond  Law, Chapter4 
(commencing with Section 16720) of Part 3 of Division 4 ofTitle 2 of the Government Code. 

(w) "Stormwater" and  "dry weather runoff' are defined as  in Section 10561.5. 

(x) "Stormwater Resource  Plans" are defined as in Part 2.3  (commencing with Section 10560) of Division 
6. 

CHAPTER 4.  Accountability. 

86003. (a)  (1) The California  Natural Resources Agency shall provide for an  independent audit of 
expenditures pursuant to this division no  less than every three years. 

(2) On  or before January 10, 2020, and  every six months thereafter, the Natural Resources 

Agency shall publish on its website a report that contains all of the following information relating to this 
division for the previous six months with the information summarized by section of this division: 

(A)  Funding encumbrances. 

(B)  Summary of new projects funded. 

(C)  Summary of projects completed. 

(D)  Discussion of progress towards meeting the metrics of success established  pursuant to 

Section 86157. 

(E)  Discussion of common challenges experienced by state agencies and  recipients of 

funding in executing projects. 

(F)  Discussion of major accomplishments and  successes experienced  by state agencies and 

recipients of funding in  executing projects. 

(3) This subsection shall remain in  effect only until January 1, 2028, and  as of that date is 

repealed. 

(b) The  Department of Finance or the Controller, or the California State Auditor at the direction of the 
Legislature, may conduct an audit of the expenditures of any state agency receiving funding pursuant to 

6 

this act. 

(c)  The  state agency issuing any grant with funding authorized  by this division shall  require adequate 
reporting of the expenditures of the funding from the grant. 

CHAPTER 5. Improvement of Water Supply and Water Quality. 

CHAPTER  5.1. Safe  Drinking Water. 

86004. The sum of seven  hundred fifty million dollars ($750,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund  to 
the State board for expenditures, grants, and  loans to improve water quality or help provide clean,  safe, 
and  reliable drinking water to all Californians. 

86005. The  projects eligible for funding pursuant to this chapter shall help improve water quality for a 
beneficial use. The  purposes of this chapter are to: 

(a)  Reduce contaminants in  drinking water supplies regardless of the source of the water or the 
contamination. 

(b) Assess and  prioritize the risk of contamination to drinking water supplies. 

(c) Address the critical and  immediate needs of disadvantaged,  rural, or small communities that suffer 
from contaminated or inadequate drinking water supplies, including, but not limited to, projects that 
address a public health emergency. 

(d)  Leverage other private, federal, state, and  local drinking water quality and wastewater treatment 
funds. 

(e)  Provide disadvantaged communities with public drinking water infrastructure that provides clean, 
safe, and  reliable drinking water supplies that the community can sustain over the long term. 

(f)  Ensure access to clean, safe,  reliable, and  affordable drinking water for California's communities. 

(g)  Meet primary and  secondary drinking water standards or remove contaminants identified by the state 
or federal government to meet primary or secondary drinking water standards. 

86006. The contaminants that may be  addressed with funding pursuant to this chapter may include, but 
shall not be  limited to, lead, nitrates, perchlorate, MTBE (methyl tertiary butyl ether), arsenic, selenium, 
hexavalent chromium, mercury, PCE  (perchloroethylene), TCE  (trichloroethylene), DCE  (dichloroethene), 
DCA (dichloroethane), 1,2,3-TCP (trichloropropane), carbon tetrachloride, 1,4-dioxane, 1,4­
dioxacyclohexane, nitrosodimethylamine, bromide, iron, manganese, total dissolved solids, electrical 
conductivity, and  uranium. 

86007. (a)  (1)  Of the funds authorized by Section 86004, five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) shall 
be available for grants and  loans for public water system  infrastructure improvements and  related actions 
to meet safe drinking water standards, ensure affordable drinking water, or both. Priority shall be  given 
to projects that provide treatment for contamination or access to an  alternate drinking water source or 
sources for small  community water systems or state small water systems in  disadvantaged communities 
whose drinking water source is impaired by chemical and  nitrate contaminants and other health hazards 

7 

identified by the State board.  Eligible recipients serve disadvantaged communities and are public 
water systems or public agencies. 

(2)  Eligible expenses may include initial operation and  maintenance costs for systems serving 

disadvantaged communities. Priority shall be given to projects that provide shared solutions for multiple 
communities, at least one of which is  a disadvantaged community that lacks safe, affordable drinking 
water and  is served  by a small community water system,  state small water system, or a private well. 
Construction grants shall be  limited to five million dollars ($5,000,000) per project, except that the State 
board may set a limit of not more than twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) for projects that provide 
regional  benefits or are shared among multiple entities, including consolidation of two or more drinking 
water systems,  at least one of which shall  be a small  disadvantaged community. Not more than 50 
percent (50%) of a grant may be  awarded in advance of actual expenditures. 

(3)  For the purposes of this subdivision, "initial operation and  maintenance costs"  means those 
initial, eligible, and  reimbursable costs under a construction funding agreement that are incurred up to, 
and  including, but not limited to, initial startup testing of the constructed project in order to deem the 
project complete. Initial operation and  maintenance costs are eligible to receive funding pursuant to this 
section for a period  not to exceed three years. 

(b) Of the funds authorized by this section, up to ten million dollars ($10,000,000) shall  be available for 
grants to provide school children with safe drinking water under the Drinking Water for Schools Grant 
Program  pursuant to Section 116276 of the Health and Safety Code. 

86008. Of the funds authorized by Section 86004, two hundred fifty million dollars ($250,000,000) shall 
be available for deposit in the State Water Pollution Control  Revolving Fund  Small Community Grant Fund 
created pursuant to Section  13477.6 for grants and  loans for wastewater treatment projects. Priority shall 
be given to projects that serve disadvantaged communities and severely disadvantaged communities, and 
to projects that address public health hazards.  Projects may include, but not be  limited to, projects that 
identify, plan, design, a.nd  implement regional mechanisms to consolidate wastewater systems or provide 
affordable treatment technologies. 

86009. Of the funds authorized by Section 86004,  up to sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) shall be  made 
available for drinking water infrastructure and/or wastewater improvements on private property, or for 
interim replacement drinking water supplies. 

(a)  Funds  may be  used for the following purposes: 

(1) To conduct water quality testing of drinking water wells. 

(2) To  install and  replace  laterals, repair or replace  private wells or onsite wastewater systems, 

properly close abandoned wells and septic system infrastructure, and  provide infrastructure necessary to 
connect residences to a public water or wastewater system. 

(3) To  replace interior drinking water plumbing and  fixtures that contain  lead. 

(4) To  provide interim replacement drinking water supplies. 

(b)  The State board  may establish a revolving loan fund to facilitate financing for activities allowable 
under this section. 

8 

(c)  Priority shall  be  given to projects that assist  low-income homeowners, including mobile home owners, 
and vulnerable populations. 

86010.  (a)  For the purposes of awarding funding pursuant to this chapter, a local cost share of not less 
than 50 percent (50%) of the total costs of the project shall  be  required. The cost-sharing requirement 
may be  waived or reduced for projects that directly benefit a disadvantaged community or an 
economically distressed area. 

(b) At  least 10 percent (10%)  of the funds available pursuant to this chapter shall  be  allocated for projects 
serving severely disadvantaged communities. 

(c)  Up to 15 percent (15%) of the funds available pursuant to this chapter may be  allocated for technical 
assistance to disadvantaged communities. The State board shall operate a multidisciplinary technical 
assistance program for small and  disadvantaged communities which may include, but is not limited to, 
outreach and  education, needs assessments, review of alternative approaches to provide communities 
with safe drinking water or wastewater services, project selection and  design, board and operator 
training, and  other technical, managerial, and financial  capacity building assistance for utilities serving 
disadvantaged communities related to providing communities with safe drinking water or wastewater 
services. The agency may also  contract with a nonprofit organization, resource  conservation district, or 
other local agency to provide these services. 

CHAPTER 5.2. Water Recycling and Desalination. 

86020. The sum of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the State 
board to award grants and  loans to eligible entities as defined in subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 on a 
competitive basis for wastewater recycling projects. Grants pursuant to this section may be made for all 
of the following: 

(a)  Water recycling projects, including,  but not limited to, treatment, storage, conveyance, brine disposal, 
and distribution facilities for potable and  nonpotable recycling projects. 

(b)  Dedicated distribution infrastructure to serve residential, commercial, agricultural, fish and wildlife 
habitat, and industrial end-user retrofit projects to allow use of recycled water. 

(c)  Pilot projects for new potable reuse and  contaminant removal technology. 

(d)  Multi-benefit recycled water projects that improve water quality. 

(e)  Multi-benefit recycled water projects that protect, conserve and  restore wetland and  other wildlife 
habitat. 

(f) Technical  assistance  and grant writing assistance related to specific projects for disadvantaged 
communities and  economically distressed areas. 

86021. The sum  of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to the State 
board to award grants to eligible entities as defined in  subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 on  a competitive 
basis for desalination of brackish groundwater, and  other brackish water desalination projects which do 

9 

not directly negatively affect riparian habitat, estuaries, coastal bays, coastal lagoons, or ocean waters of 
California as defined by the State board. Grants pursuant to this section  must comply with the 
requirements of this section, and may be made for all of the following: 

(a)  Treatment, storage, conveyance, and  distribution facilities. Projects may remove contaminants in 
addition to salts, but shall be  primarily constructed and operated to remove salt. 

(b)  Distribution infrastructure to serve residential, commercial, agricultural, fish and  wildlife habitat, and 
industrial end-user retrofit projects to allow use of desalted water. 

(c)  Multi-benefit salt removal projects that improve water quality. 

(d) Technical assistance and  grant writing assistance related to specific projects for disadvantaged 
communities and  economically distressed areas. 

(e)  Multi-benefit salt removal projects that provide water supply for wetland and other wildlife habitat. 

(f) Technical assistance and grant writing assistance related  to specific projects for disadvantaged 
communities and  economically distressed areas. 

86022. No grant made pursuant to this chapter shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the project, 
but this requirement may be  eliminated or reduced for that portion of projects that primarily serve 
disadvantaged communities, economically distressed areas, or wildlife habitat. 

86023. Projects funded pursuant to this chapter shall be selected on a competitive basis with priority 
given to the following criteria: 

(a)  Water supply reliability improvement. 

(b) Water quality and ecosystem benefits related to decreased reliance on  diversions from the Delta or 
from local rivers and streams, and  benefits related to attainment of beneficial uses and  water quality 
objectives in  local  receiving waters. 

(c)  Public health benefits from improved drinking water quality or supply. 

(d)  Cost-effectiveness, based  on the amount of water produced per dollar invested, and  othercost­
effectiveness criteria adopted  by the State board. 

(e)  Energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emission reductions. 

(f) Water supply or water quality improvements benefitting disadvantaged communities. 

(g)  Protection and  restoration of fish and  wildlife habitat, as well as  provision of a reliable water supply for 
fish  and wildlife. 

CHAPTER  5.3. Water Conservation. 

86030. The sum of three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the 

10 

department for the following purposes: 

(a) Statewide turf removal program. 

(1) The  program shall provide financial incentives to public and  private property owners to 

convert their irrigated or watered landscaping to drought tolerant plantings, including appropriate low 
water using plants. The department shall set a maximum amount each  applicant can  receive, and shall 
allow greater incentives to low-income homeowners who could  not otherwise afford to participate in the 
landscape water conversion program. No  less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the funds allocated to 
this program shall be spent on  programs benefitting residential property owners. The  department shall 
make awards to nonresidential applicants on the basis of cost-effectiveness with respect to water supply. 
Each  grant must reduce water consumption by at least fifty percent (50%) compared to current water 
use. 

(2) The most cost-effective projects and those projects that provide the greatest environmental 
benefits based on the state investment shall  receive  highest priority for funding.  Environmental benefits 
shall include, but not be  limited to, planting appropriate drought resistant native and  other plants, 
reduction in consumptive water use, and  increased availability of water for environmental benefits. 

(3) The department shall not reject or reduce eligibility to residents residing in service areas 

which have previously offered turf removal rebate programs as long as the  resident was  not a participant 
in the program. 

(4) The department shall cooperate with eligible entities as  defined in subdivision (a) of Section 
86166 and the California  Public Utilities Commission to develop an  on-bill repayment mechanism to pay 
for the consumer's share of the landscape conversion project. 

(b)  Leak detection. 

(1) Competitive grants on a matching basis to public water systems to reduce  leaks in their water 
distribution systems, eliminate leaks in the water systems of their customers if the water system operator 
determines that customer leak detection and  elimination is a cost-effective way to improve the water 
system operator's water supply and  provides a public benefit, and  install instrumentation to detect leaks 
at residential, institutional, and  commercial properties. The department shall  make awards on the basis of 
cost-effectiveness with respect to water supply. Water system operators receiving grants pursuant to this 
subdivision shall give highest priority to leak detection and  water waste elimination programs in 
disadvantaged communities and economically distressed areas. 

(2)  No grant award shall exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the  project. Cost sharing may be 

reduced or eliminated for a grant award that primarily benefits residential property owners in  a 
disadvantaged community or an  economically distressed area. 

(c) Toilet replacement. Competitive grants on  a matching basis to public water systems or eligible entities 
as defined in subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 to replace toilets using more than three gallons per flush 
with new toilets that conserve water and flush  1.28 gallons per flush or less. The department shall make 
awards on the basis of cost-effectiveness with respect to water supply.  Entities receiving grants pursuant 
to this subdivision shall give highest priority to toilet replacement programs in disadvantaged 
communities and economically distressed areas. 

11 

(d)  Water meters. Installation of water meters in disadvantaged communities that are  not metered. 

(e)  Energy saving water conservation. Competitive grants on  a matching basis to public water systems to 
undertake water conservation  projects that promote saving energy. These  projects shall  document the 
greenhouse gas emission reductions coming from water conservation programs. The  department shall 
make awards on the basis of cost-effectiveness with respect to water supply as well as energy savings. 
Highest priority shall  be given to programs in  disadvantaged communities and economically distressed 
areas. 

(f) In determining how to allocate the funds appropriated pursuant to this section, the department shall 
determine which technologies are  most cost-effective, produce the greatest environmental benefits, and 
provide the most benefit to disadvantaged communities and  economically distressed areas. 

(g) Any entity receiving a grant pursuant to this section may use grant funds to establish a revolving fund 
from which the entity may make loans to implement water conservation programs. The  interest rate shall 
be established by the entity, and  the entity may charge  a reasonable  administration fee to be paid along 
with the interest on the loan over the lifetime of the loan. Payments made on loans made pursuant to 
this program shall  be  returned to the revolving fund to be  used for additional loans to implement water 
conservation  programs.  Loans made pursuant to this section may be  for up to 15 years,  or for the useful 
life of the water conservation  project, whichever is shorter. 

86031. The sum offifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to the California 
Energy Commission for the Water Energy Technology Program to accelerate the deployment of 
innovative water and energy saving technologies and help continue to make water conservation a 
California way of life. 

86032. (a) The  purpose of this section is to help make it possible to improve flows in tributaries to the 
Delta, and to expedite the transfer of conserved agricultural water while minimizing impacts on water 
rights holders. 

(b) The sum  of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000} is appropriated from the Fund to the department for 
matching grants to local agencies to aid  in the construction and  implementation of agricultural water 
conservation projects, and for grants in accordance with Section 79158. 

(c)  For the purposes of approving a grant under this section, the department shall determine if there will 
be  a net savings of water as  a result of each  proposed project and  if the project is cost-effective and 
technically sound. 

(d) A project under this section shall  not receive more than five million dollars ($5,000,000}  in grant 
proceeds from the department. 

(e) The  department shall give  preference to the most cost-effective and  technically sound projects. 

(f)  Priority shall be given to grants that result in  water savings which are used to improve the quality of 
fish  and  wildlife through increased flows in tributaries to the  Delta. Grants improving internal water 
district efficiency for other uses and transfers are  also eligible for funding. 

(g)  No  project may cause adverse impacts to fish  or wildlife without mitigating those impacts below a 
level of significance. The cost of mitigation may be included in grant funds. 

12 


CHAPTER 5.4. Flood  Management for Improved Water Supply. 

86040.  (a) The  sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000} is appropriated from the Fund  to the 
Central Valley Flood  Protection Board for: 

(1)  Enlargement and environmental enhancement of existing floodways and  bypasses within the 

jurisdiction of the Central Valley Flood  Protection Board, including providing recreation opportunities. 

(2)  Improvement of flood control facilities and  environmental enhancement within the 

jurisdiction of the Central Valley Flood  Protection Board. 

(b) To be eligible for funding under this section, a project shall provide reduced  flood  risk,  reduced 
liability, or reduced  maintenance responsibility for state agencies or local flood control districts or both. 

(c) The Central Valley Flood Protection Board shall give  preference to: 

(1) Those  projects that primarily benefit disadvantaged communities or economically distressed 

areas. 

(2)  Multi-benefit projects designed to reduce flood  risk and  enhance fish  and wildlife habitat by 

allowing rivers and floodplains to function more naturally. These  projects create additional public benefits 
such  as  protecting farms and ranches,  improving water quality, increasing groundwater recharge,  and 
providing public recreation opportunities. 

(3) Those  projects that include matching funds, including but not limited to matching funds from 

other state agencies.  Matching fund requirements may be  reduced or eliminated to the extent the project 
directly benefits disadvantaged communities or economically distressed areas. 

(d)  The  Central Valley Flood Protection Board may make grants to eligible entities as defined in 
subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 to implement this section. 

(e) The Central Valley Flood  Protection Board may use  up to one million ($1,000,000) of these funds to 
develop a programmatic permit for authorization of habitat restoration and related multi-benefit floodplain 
restoration projects whose primary purpose is restoration and that meet the criteria described in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. 

(f) Of the amount appropriated in paragraph (a), fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall  be  awarded for 
matching grants to public agencies to construct flood control improvements to existing dams on rivers in 
the Sacramento Valley that provide flood  protection to urbanized areas.  If these funds are not awarded 
for this purpose by January 1,  2032, they may be  used for the other purposes of this section. 

86041. (a) The sum  of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund  to the 
department for grants to local agencies on a fifty percent (50%)  matching basis to repair or reoperate 
reservoirs that provide flood control either as a principal  purpose or as  an  indirect effect of their 
operation. Grantees must demonstrate that the proposed  repair or reoperation will increase the amount 
of water stored in  those  reservoirs that could  be  put to beneficial  use.  No funds appropriated under this 
section shall be  used to raise  the height of any dam. Spillway modification projects that do not raise the 

13 

crest height of the dam are  eligible for grant funds. 

(b)  (1) To  be  eligible for funding under this section, a project must provide substantial increases in 
recreational opportunities, such as trails along river channels,  and significant net improvements to fish 
and  wildlife habitat in and adjacent to the river channel downstream of the reservoir, and  to the extent 
compatible with safe  reservoir operation, within the reservoir. At least ten percent (10%) of project costs 
shall  be  allocated to these recreational and  habitat purposes. The funds to carry out these purposes shall 
be  allocated  by the department directly to a state conservancy if there is  a conservancy with jurisdiction 
over the area of the project. If there is no conservancy, the Natural Resources Agency's California River 
Parkways Program  shall  contract with an eligible entity as  defined in subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 to 
carry out these purposes. The agency operating the reservoir being repaired or reoperated shall approve 
the recreational and  habitat elements of the project and  shall not charge any fees for review, plan  check, 
permits, inspections, or any other related costs associated  with the project, and shall  provide permanent 
operation and  maintenance of the entire project, including the habitat and  recreational elements. 
Projects may include grants to eligible entities as  defined in subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 to implement 
this paragraph. 

(2)  All costs associated  with the requirements of this subdivision may be  paid for with funds 

provided to local agencies by this section, and do not have to be matched by the agency. 

(c)  Grants made pursuant to this section may be for the purpose of seismic retrofit. 

(d)  No grants made pursuant to this section shall be for reservoir maintenance or sediment removal from 
the reservoir or upstream of the reservoir, except as  necessary to complete projects authorized under 
paragraphs (a),  (b), and (c). 

(e) Applicants shall  certify that projects paid for by funds provided  by this section will be permanently 
operated and  maintained. 

(f) First priority shall be given to projects that benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(g)  Projects to assist in the reoperation of eligible  reservoirs shall increase water supply for beneficial uses 
through the purchase and  installation of water measuring equipment, acquisition of information systems, 
and  the use of technologies and data to improve reservoir management. 

(h)  (1)  A local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that receives funding under this 
chapterto create recreational facilities or wildlife habitat may use  up to twenty percent (20%) of those 
funds to establish a trust fund that is exclusively used to help pay for the maintenance and monitoring of 
those recreational facilities or wildlife habitat. 

(2) A local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that acquires an  interest in  land, 

recreation facilities or wildlife habitat with money from this chapter and  transfers the interest in  land, 
recreational facilities or wildlife habitat to another public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization 
shall  also transfer the ownership of the trust fund that was established to maintain that interest in the 
land, recreational facilities or wildlife habitat. 

(3) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(4)  If the local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund 

14 


pursuant to this subdivision, the agency, tribe or organization shall  certify to the state agency making the 
grant that it can  maintain the land,  recreational facilities or wildlife habitat to be  acquired or developed 
from funds otherwise available to the agency, tribe or organization. 

(5)  If the interest in  land, recreational facilities or wildlife habitat is condemned or if the local 
public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization determines that the interest in  land,  recreational 
facilities or wildlife habitat is unable to fulfill the purposes for which money from this chapter was 
expended, the trust fund and any unexpended interest are appropriated to the agency that provided the 
money. The funds returned to the agency may be  utilized only for projects pursuant to this section. 

(i) The department shall give preference to those projects that coordinate reservoir reoperation with the 
provision of water for groundwater recharge through conjunctive use or other integrated 
surface/groundwater projects. 

86042. The sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the San 
Francisco Bay  Restoration Authority to  provide matching grants for flood management, wetlands 
restoration, and other projects consistent with Article 2 (commencing with Section 66704.5) of Chapter 5 
of Title 7 .25 of the Government Code.  For purposes of this section,  matching funds may include funds 
provided  by local governments, regional governments, the federal government, private parties, or other 
funds raised  by the San  Francisco  Bay Restoration Authority. No grant shall  exceed fifty percent (50%)  of 
the cost of the project. 

86043. (a)(l) A local  public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that receives funding under this 
chapterto acquire an  interest in  land may use  up to twenty percent (20%) of those funds to establish a 
trust fund that is exclusively used to help pay for the maintenance and  monitoring of that interest in land. 

(2) A local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that acquires an  interest in  land 
with money from this chapter and transfers the interest in land to another public agency,  Indian tribe or 
nonprofit organization shall also transfer the ownership of the trust fund that was established to maintain 
that interest inland. 

(3) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(b) If the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund 
pursuant to subdivision (a), the agency, tribe or organization shall  certify to the state agency making the 
grant that it can  maintain the land to be  acquired from funds otherwise available to the agency, tribe or 
organization. 

(c)  If the interest in  land is condemned or if the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization 
determines that the interest in  land  is  unable to fulfill the purposes for which money from this chapter 
was expended, the trust fund and any unexpended interest are  appropriated to the agency that provided 
the money. The  funds returned to the agency may be utilized only for projects pursuant to this chapter. 

CHAPTER  5.5. Funding for Water Measurement and  Information. 

86048. The sum of sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund  for water 
measurement and  information systems,  as follows: 

(a) The sum  of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) is appropriated to the department for development of 

15 


methods and  installation of water measuring equipment to improve estimates of water balance, water 
budgets, diversions and  water use to support water allocations, drought management, groundwater 
management, water quality management and water rights. 

(b) The sum  of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) is  appropriated to the State board for development of 
information systems, technologies, and data that improve the State board's ability to manage water 
rights. These systems will include, but not be limited to, digitizing and making available the 10 million 
pages of paper records on water rights within the State board and  in other repositories and  the creation 
of a digital repository for water diversion and  use data. 

(c) The sum often million dollars ($10,000,000) is  appropriated to the Water Data Administration Fund 
established  pursuant to Section 12420, to be  used  by the department in  consultation with the State board 
for the purpose of making California water information interoperable, consistent with Part 4.9 of Division 
6 of the Water Code. 

(d) The  sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) is appropriated as follows: 

(1)  Five  million dollars ($5,000,000) is appropriated to the University of California for its multi­

campus Water Security and Sustainability Research  Initiative to develop core elements of a water 
resources  information system, in  cooperation with the department and the State board. 

(2)  Five  million dollars ($5,000,000) is  appropriated to the California Water Institute at California 

State University, Fresno to undertake research  leading to improvement and  conservation of water 
supplies and  improved water quality in California. 

(3)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000) is appropriated to the Irrigation Training and  Research Center 
at California  Polytechnic State University San  Luis Obispo to undertake research  leading to improvement 
and  conservation of water supplies and  improved water quality in  California. 

(4)  Five  million dollars ($5,000,000) is appropriated to the Office of Water Programs at California 
State University, Sacramento to undertake research  leading to improvement and  conservation of water 
supplies and  improved water quality in California. 

(5) The  institutions of higher education receiving funds pursuant to this paragraph shall work 
together to assure that their efforts do not conflict or overlap, but are complementary to each  other. 

CHAPTER  5.6. Capture and Use of Urban Runoff and Stormwater. 

86050. (a) The sum  of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to the 
State board for projects to capture and  use urban dry weather runoff and stormwater runoff. All grants 
made pursuant to this section  by the State board  for construction  projects must be to counties or cities,  a 
city and  county, or a joint powers authority containing a city, county, or city and  county with 
responsibility for flood control or management. The State board may spend  up to fifty million dollars 
($50,000,000) for grants to eligible entities as defined in  subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 to develop 
Stormwater Resource  Plans.  Funds available pursuant to this section shall  be allocated to projects serving 
and  providing a direct benefit to disadvantaged and severely disadvantaged  communities. The State 
board  may use these funds to make grants for technical assistance  and  outreach to disadvantaged 
communities. 

16 

(b) The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the California Tahoe 
Conservancy for projects to capture and  use dry weather runoff and stormwater runoff in the Lake Tahoe 
Basin pursuant to Title 7.42 (commencing with Section 66905) of the Government Code. 

(c) The  sum of forty million dollars ($40,000,000} is appropriated from the Fund to the Santa Monica 
Mountains Conservancy for projects to capture and  use dry weather runoff and  stormwater runoff 
pursuant to Division 23 (commencing with Section 33000)  of the Public Resources Code  in the area 
defined in  paragraph (2) of subdivision (d)  of Section 86080. 

(d) The sum  of forty million dollars ($40,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the San Gabriel and 
Lower Los Angeles Rivers and  Mountains Conservancy for projects to capture and  use  dry weather runoff 
and  storm water runoff pursuant to Division 22.8 (commencing with Section 32600) of the Public 
Resources Code. 

(e)  The sum of forty million dollars ($40,000,000} is  appropriated from the Fund to the State Coastal 
Conservancy for projects to capture and  use dry weather runoff and stormwater runoff pursuant to 
Division 21  (commencing with Section 31000) of the  Public  Resources. 

(f)  Funds spent pursuant to this section shall be  used  for competitive grants for projects that develop, 
implement, or improve multi-benefit projects identified and  prioritized in Stormwater Resource  Plans 
consistent with Part 2.3  (commencing with Section  10560) of Division 6,as that part may be  amended, 
and shall include as  many as  possible of the following benefits: capture and treatment of stormwater or 
dry weather runoff for beneficial uses;  removal of pollutants from the captured and treated runoff; 
creation or restoration of habitat or parkland to capture and treat storm water or dry weather runoff for 
beneficial  uses by using best management practices that improve environmental quality; removal of 
pollutants from the captured and  treated runoff; creation or restoration of habitat or parkland; storage, 
infiltration or use of the captured and treated runoff to augment local water supplies; creation or 
restoration of native habitat, trails, park land or other natural open space;  reduction of urban heat 
islands; and  provision of other public recreational opportunities. Projects that include wetlands and 
native habitat or project elements designed to mimic or restore natural watershed functions shall be 
given the highest priority. 

(g) Of the amount appropriated pursuant to subdivision (a),  at least forty million dollars ($40,000,000} 
shall be  available for projects that reduce the flow of trash and  other pollutants: (1) into a National 
Estuarine Research  Reserve, onto beaches, or into near-shore coastal waters in San  Diego County, or (2) 
into San  Diego Bay.  Priority shall  be given to projects that reduce the flow of trash or other pollutants into 
one or more units of the State Parks System. 

86051. (a)  Each  state agency  receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall  require at least a fifty percent 
(50%) cost share by  recipients of grant funds, but may eliminate or reduce the matching requirements for 
that portion of projects primarily benefiting disadvantaged communities or economically distressed areas. 

(b)  Projects funded  by this section must comply with water quality policies or regulations adopted by the 
State board or the regional water quality control board with jurisdiction over the project. 

(c)  Project costs may include development of decision support tools, data acquisition, and  geographic 
information system data analysis to identify and  evaluate the benefits and  costs of potentialstormwater 
capture and  reuse projects. 

17 

(d)  Preference shall  be  granted to projects that divert stormwater or dry weather runoff from storm 
drains or channels and  put it to beneficial use. 

(e)  Agencies  receiving funds pursuant to this section shall give high priority to projects benefitting 
disadvantaged communities.  Each  agency receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall  allocate at least 
thirty-five percent (35%) of the funds they receive for projects that benefit disadvantaged communities. 

(f) In  implementing this chapter, each  agency receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall consult with 
the Natural Resources Agency regarding the integration and  prioritization of the habitat, park land, open 
space, recreational and  public use components of storm water and dry weather runoff capture and reuse 
projects, and  shall seek assistance from the Natural Resources Agency in the review and scoring of 
proposed  projects. 

(g)  Projects may prevent stormwater and  dry weather runoff from entering storm drains or channels. 

86052. Entities defined in subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 are eligible to receive funds under subdivisions 
(b),  (c),  (d) and  (e)  of Section 86050. 

86053. Funds allocated  pursuant to this chapter may be  granted to an  eligible applicant for single or 
multiple small-scale projects that are consistent with Chapter 6.5 of Division 2 of the Fish  and Game Code, 
regardless of whether that Chapter is  still in effect. 

Chapter 5.7. Integrated Regional Water Management. 

86054. The sum  of five million dollars ($5,000,000) is allocated to the department to provide direct 
funding support to approved Integrated Regional Water Management (IRWM) regional  water 
management groups for the purpose of maintaining ongoing IRWM  planning and  implementation efforts, 
thereby sustaining the significant investment made through IRWM for regional collaboration on water 
management. 

CHAPTER 6.  Watershed, Land,  and  Fisheries Improvements. 

CHAPTER 6.1. Watershed  Improvement for Water Supply and  Water Quality Enhancement. 

86080. The  sum of two billion three hundred fifty-five million dollars ($2,355,000,000}  is  appropriated 
from the Fund to protect, restore and  improve the health of watershed  lands, including forest lands 
(including oaks,  redwoods and  sequoias), meadows, wetlands, chaparral, riparian habitat and  other 
watershed lands, including lands owned by the United States, in  order to protect and  improve water 
supply and water quality, improve forest health, reduce fire danger consistent with the best available 
science, mitigate the effects of wildfires on water quality and  supply, increase flood  protection, remediate 
aquifers, or to protect or restore riparian or aquatic resources.  No grants made  pursuant to this section 
shall  be for reservoir maintenance or sediment removal from a reservoir or upstream of a reservoir, 
except as  necessary for field  research  required pursuant to subdivision  (a).  Funds shall be allocated as 
follows: 

(a) Two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) to the Sierra  Nevada  Conservancy for the protection, 
restoration and  improvement of Sierra  Nevada watersheds,  pursuant to Division 23.3 (commencing with 
Section 33300) of the Public Resources Code  and  including the purposes outlined in Section 33320 of the 
Public Resources Code.  Funds shall also be  spent for the implementation and to further the goals and 

18 

purposes of the Sierra  Nevada Watershed  Improvement Program.  Projects eligible for funding under the 
Sierra  Nevada  Watershed Improvement Program may include  research and  monitoring to measure the 
impact of forest restoration work on water supply, climate and other benefits, including long-term air 
quality, water quality and  quantity, greenhouse gas emissions, carbon storage,  habitat, recreational uses, 
and  community vitality. Projects funded under the Sierra  Nevada watershed Improvement Program shall 
be  based on the best available science  regarding forest restoration and  must be  undertaken to improve 
water supply and quality, protect and  restore ecological values and to promote forest conditions that are 
more resilient to wildfire, climate change,  and other disturbances. The Sierra  Nevada  Conservancy may 
make grants to federal agencies if it determines such grants are the most efficient way to implement the 
intent of this division on  federally managed  lands. 

(b) Sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) to the California Tahoe Conservancy for the protection and 
restoration of watersheds of the Lake Tahoe Basin,  pursuant to Title 7.42 (commencing with Section 
66905) of the Government Code.  Funds shall be spent for implementation and to further the goals and 
purposes of the Lake Tahoe Environmental Improvement Program, pursuant to Article 6 ofChapter 1.692 
of Division 5 (commencing with Section 5096.351) of the Public Resources Code. 

(c) One  hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) to the San  Francisco Bay Area  Conservancy Program of the 
Coastal Conservancy for the protection and  restoration of watersheds of the San  Francisco Bay Area, 
pursuant to Chapter 4.5 of Division 21 of the Public Resources Code (commencing with Section 31160). 

(d)  One hundred eighty million dollars ($180,000,000) for the protection and  restoration of watersheds of 
Los Angeles, Ventura, and  Orange Counties as follows: 

(1) Sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) to the San  Gabriel and  Lower Los Angeles  Rivers and 

Mountains Conservancy for the protection and  restoration of the watersheds of the San  Gabriel and 
Lower Los Angeles Rivers pursuant to Division 22.8 (commencing with Section 32600) of the Public 
Resources Code. 

(2) Sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) to the Santa  Monica Mountains Conservancy, for the 

protection and  restoration of the watersheds of Santa  Monica Bay, the Upper Los Angeles River and the 
Upper Santa Clara  River pursuant to Division 23  (commencing with Section 33000) of the Public Resources 
Code, and the watersheds defined in  subdivision (c) of Section 79570. 

(3) Thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) to the Santa  Ana  River Conservancy Program of the Coastal 
Conservancy for the protection and  restoration of watersheds of the Santa Ana  River pursuant to Chapter 
4.6 of Division 21 of the Public Resources Code  (commencing with Section31170). 

(4) Thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) to the Baldwin  Hills Conservancy for the protection and 
restoration of the Baldwin Hills and  Ba Ilona Creek watersheds, and for projects to capture dry weather 
runoff and storm water runoff pursuant to Division 22.7  (commencing with Section 32550) of the Public 
Resources Code. 

(e)  Forty million dollars ($40,000,000) to the San  Diego River Conservancy for the protection and 
restoration of watersheds in San  Diego County pursuant to Division of 22.9  (commencing with Section 
32630) of the  Public Resources Code. 

(f)  One  hundred thirty-five million dollars ($135,000,000) to the State Coastal Conservancy for the 
protection and  restoration of coastal watersheds pursuant to Division 21 (commencing with Section 

19 

31000) of the Public Resources Code. 

(g)  One hundred fifty million dollars ($150,000,000) for the protection and  restoration of the watersheds 
ofthe Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers as follows: 

(1) One  hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) to the Sacramento-San Joaquin  Delta Conservancy 
for protection and  restoration of the Delta  pursuant to Division 22.3  (commencing with Section 32300) of 
the Public Resources Code.  Highest priority shall be  given to projects that benefit the restoration of native 
species and that reduce the negative impacts of excessive salinity intrusion. Highest priority shall also  be 
given to projects that restore habitat important to species listed pursuant to the federal  Endangered 
Species Act (16 U.S.C. Chapter 35) and the California State Endangered Species Act (Fish  and Game  Code 
Sections 2050-2100). The funds may also  be  used for improvement of public recreational facilities in the 
Delta, and for grants to local agencies and  nonprofit organizations to increase community access to parks 
and  recreational opportunities for underserved  urban communities in the Delta. The Conservancy may 
implement programs designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the Delta. 

(2) Twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) to the San Joaquin  River Conservancy for the 

implementation of the San Joaquin River Parkway pursuant to Division 22.5 (commencing with Section 
32500) of the Public Resources Code. 

(3) Thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) to the Lower American River Conservancy Fund created  by 

Section 5845.9 of the Public Resources Code. The  Wildlife Conservation  Board shall  use these funds to 
implement Chapter 10.5 of Division 5 of the Public Resources Code  (commencing with Section 5845). 

(h) One  hundred and  seventy million dollars ($170,000,000) for river parkways, as follows: 

(1) Seventy million dollars ($70,000,000) to the California  Natural Resources Agency for projects 

pursuant the California  River Parkways Act of 2004, Chapter 3.8 (commencing with Section 5750) of 
Division 5 of the Public Resources Code. The Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency shall allocate at 
least sixty-five percent (65%) of these funds for projects that benefit disadvantaged communities. With 
the remaining funds, the Secretary shall seek to benefit poorer communities that do  not qualify as 
disadvantaged communities. 

(2) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the State Coastal Conservancy for grants to nonprofit 

organizations and  local public agencies to implement river parkway projects for habitat restoration, public 
recreation, and water quality improvement along the Guadalupe River corridor. 

(3) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the State Coastal Conservancy for grants to  nonprofit 

organizations and  local public agencies to implement river parkway projects for habitat restoration, public 
recreation, and water quality improvement along the Russian  River corridor. 

(4) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the State Coastal  Conservancy for grants to nonprofit 

organizations and  local public agencies to implement river parkway projects for habitat restoration, public 
recreation, and water quality improvement along the Santa  Clara  River corridor. 

(5) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the State Coastal  Conservancy for grants to nonprofit 

organizations and  local public agencies to implement river parkway projects for habitat restoration, public 
recreation, and water quality improvement along the Tijuana  River corridor. 

20 

(6) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the State Coastal Conservancy for grants to nonprofit 

organizations and  local public agencies to implement river parkway projects for habitat restoration, public 
recreation, and  water quality improvement along the Carmel  River corridor. 

(7) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the State Coastal  Conservancy for grants to nonprofit 

organizations and  local public agencies to implement river parkway projects for habitat restoration,  public 
recreation, and  water quality improvement along the Napa  River corridor. 

(8)  Fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) to the State Coastal Conservancy for river parkway 

projects within the San  Diego Bay watershed. 

(9)  Fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) to the State Coastal Conservancy for river parkway 

projects along the Santa  Margarita River in San  Diego County. 

(10) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) to the California Tahoe Conservancy to implement habitat 
restoration, public recreation, and  water quality improvements along the Upper Truckee River corridor. 

(i) One  hundred fifty million dollars ($150,000,000) shall  be available for projects that restore, protect and 
preserve the Los Angeles River and  its tributaries, as follows: 

(1) Seventy-five million dollars ($75,000,000) to the San Gabriel and  Lower Los Angeles Rivers and 

Mountains Conservancy pursuant to Division 22.8 (commencing with Section 32600) of the Public 
Resources Code, and Section 79508 of the Water Code. 

(2) Seventy-five million dollars ($75,000,000) to the Santa  Monica Mountains Conservancy 

pursuant to Division 23  (commencing with Section 33000) of the Public Resources Code,  and Section 
79508 of the Water Code. 

(j) Three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) to the Wildlife Conservation  Board for the  following: 

(1)  For the protection and  restoration of the watersheds of the Sacramento, Smith, Eel, and 

Klamath  Rivers and other rivers of Marin, Sonoma, Mendocino, Humboldt and  Del  Norte Counties, and 
the Carrizo Plain  pursuant to Chapter 4 of Division 2 (commencing with Section  1300) of the Fish  and 
Game Code. 

(2)  For protection and  restoration of oak woodlands and  rangelands pursuant to Division 10.4 

(commencing with Section 10330) of the Public Resources Code and Article 3.5 (commencing with Section 
1360) of Chapter 4 of Division 2 of the Fish and  Game Code. 

(3)  For acquisition and  restoration of riparian habitat, migratory bird  habitat, anadromous 

fisheries, wetland habitat and  other watershed lands pursuant to Chapter 4 of Division 2 (commencing 
with  Section  1300)  of the  Fish  and  Game  Code. 

(4) Grants may include funding to help fulfill state commitments to implement Natural 

Community Conservation Plans adopted pursuant to Chapter 10 of Division 3 (commencing with Section 
2800) of the Fish  and  Game  Code,  and to large scale  regional  Habitat Conservation Plans adopted 
pursuant to the federal  Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. Chapter 35). 

21 


(5) Of the amount made available pursuant to this subdivision, the sum  of ten million dollars 
($10,000,000) shall  be  available to assist farmers in  integrating agricultural activities with watershed 
restoration and wildlife protection. Priority shall be  given to projects that include partnerships with 
resource  conservation districts. 

(6) Of the amount made available pursuant to this subdivision, the sum of fifty million dollars 

($50,000,000) is appropriated to the Oak Woodlands Conservation Fund  established  by Section 1363 of 
the  Fish  and  Game Code, and  may be expended  pursuant to Article 3.5 of Chapter 4 of Division 2 of the 
Fish  and  Game Code. 

(7) Of the amount made available pursuant to this subdivision, the sum of thirty million dollars 

($30,000,000) shall be available for grazing land protection pursuant to the California  Rangeland, Grazing 
Land  and  Grassland  Protection Act, commencing with Section 10330 of Division 10.4 of the Public 
Resources Code. 

(8) Of the amount made available pursuant to this subdivision, not less than sixty million dollars 

($60,000,000) shall be available for projects that advance the conservation objectives of natural 
community conservation plans adopted pursuant to the Natural Community Conservation Planning Act, 
Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 2800) of Division 3 of the Fish  and  Game Code.  First priority shall 
be given to plans that include protection of aquatic ecosystems. Funding pursuant to this paragraph shall 
not be  used to offset mitigation obligations otherwise required. 

(k) Twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000) to the Coachella Valley Mountains Conservancy for the 
protection and  restoration of the Coachella Valley watershed pursuant to Division 23.5 (commencing with 
Section 33500) of the Public Resources Code. 

(I)  One  hundred fifty million dollars ($150,000,000) to the Department of Parks  and  Recreation for 
protection and restoration of watershed lands within and affecting units of the State Parks System, 
with high priority to redwood and other forest land important to protecting river and stream flows 
and  quality. In  addition to other purposes authorized pursuant to this section, the Department of 
Parks and Recreation may allocate funds to improve and  increase the efficiency and  effectiveness of 
State Park water supply and wastewater treatment systems. 

(m) Sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) to the Department of Conservation for watershed  restoration and 
conservation projects on  agricultural lands, rangelands, managed wetlands, and forested lands. 

(1)  No less than thirteen million dollars ($13,000,000) shall be  used for grants pursuant to Section 

9084 of the Public Resources Code. 

(2)  No  less than thirty-one million dollars ($31,000,000) shall  be  used for the purposes ofDivision 

10.2 (commencing with Section 10200) of the Public Resources Code. 

(3) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) shall  be  used  for the Watershed Coordinator Grant Program. 

(n)  One  hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) to the California Ocean  Protection Council for projects 
that: (1)  reduce the amount of pollutants that flow to beaches,  bays,  coastal estuaries, and  near-shore 
ecosystems; and  (2)  protect coastal and  near-shore ocean  resources from the impacts of rising sea levels, 
storm surges, ocean acidification and  related hazards, including,  but not limited to,  increasing the 
resiliency of near-shore ocean habitats. Projects may include, but are not limited to, projects that protect 

22 

or restore beaches, coastal estuaries and  watersheds, bays, and  near-shore ecosystems including marine 
protected areas. Of this amount, the Council  shall  use at least five million dollars ($5,000,000) for the 
Local Coastal  Program sea  level rise  grant program that supports Local Coastal Program updates to 
address sea  level rise,  including sea-level  rise modeling, vulnerability assessments, and  adaptation 
planning and  policy development. 

(o) The sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) is appropriated from the  Fund to the Natural 
Resources Agency, for water-related projects that implement the Natural Resources Agency's Salton Sea 
Management Program consistent with provisions of Article 2 (commencing with Section 2940) of Chapter 
13 of Division 3 of the Fish  and  Game Code, and  in fulfillment of the obligations of the State of California 
to comply with the terms of Chapters 611,  612,  613,  and  614 of the Statutes of 2003. These  statutes were 
enacted to facilitate the execution and  implementation of the Quantification Settlement Agreement, 
including restoration of the Salton Sea.  The  Natural Resources Agency may expend these funds on 
projects that provide multiple benefits of ecosystem restoration, air quality improvement, and  economic 
recovery for severely disadvantaged communities. 

(1) Of the amount appropriated pursuant to this paragraph, not less than twenty million dollars 

($20,000,000) shall be available for purposes consistent with the New River Water Quality, Public Health, 
and  River Parkway Development Program, as described in Section 71103.6 of the Public Resources Code. 

(2) Of the amount allocated pursuant to this section, the sum  of one million dollars ($1,000,000) shall be 
available for a Salton Sea  Integrated Watershed  Plan  providing technical assistance for, outreach to, and 
engagement with severely disadvantaged communities. 

(p)  Five million dollars ($5,000,000) to the Delta Stewardship Council for the Delta Science Program as 
described in Section 85280. 

(q)  Fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) to the department for Urban Streams Restoration  Program 
competitive grants pursuant to Section 7048. The department shall allocate at least sixty-five {65%)  of 
these  funds  for  projects  that  benefit  disadvantaged  communities. With the remaining funds, the 
department shall seek to benefit poorer communities that do not qualify as disadvantaged communities. 

(r) Twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) to the California  Department of Forestry and  Fire  Protection for 
grants for urban forestry projects that manage, capture or conserve stormwater, recharge local 
groundwater supplies or improve water supplies or water quality through infiltration, sediment 
management and  erosion control pursuant to the California  Urban Forestry Act, Chapter 2 (commencing 
with Section 4799.06) of Part 2.5 of Division  4 of the Public Resources Code. 

(s)  Fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) to the Delta  Protection Commission for expenditures, grants, or 
loans for projects that improve water quality by improving wastewater treatment in  Delta  legacy 
communities (as  described in  section 32301(f) of the  Public Resources Code)  and  at recreational facilities 
in the Delta.  Funds may be expended on wastewater improvement projects serving Delta  legacy 
communities, or Delta  legacy community households with failing septic systems which threaten the 
quality of groundwater or surface water supplies used for urban, agricultural or fisheries purposes.  Funds 
may also  be  allocated to improve and  increase the efficiency and  effectiveness of Delta recreational 
facility wastewater treatment systems.  Priority shall  be given to projects that address public health 
hazards.  Projects may identify, plan,  design, and  implement regional mechanisms to consolidate 
wastewater systems or provide affordable treatment technologies. 

23 

(t) Twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) to the Department of Parks and  Recreation for projects that 
provide access to rivers for non-motorized recreation, and for grants to eligible entities as defined in 
subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 for this purpose. First priority shall be given to projects that include 
matching funds,  and to projects that serve disadvantaged communities and  economically distressed 
areas, whether or not they include cost sharing. 

(u)  (1) Twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) to the Wildlife Conservation  Board  for the construction of a 
Pacific Flyway Center in the vicinity of the Suisun  Marsh, to be  operated by the California  Department of 
Fish  and Wildlife. The Department of Fish and  Wildlife may contract with a nonprofit organization to 
oper_ate the Center. The Center shall be used to educate the public about the importance of California's 
wetlands, agricultural lands (including rice)  and  riparian areas in benefitting waterfowl, shorebirds, native 
plants and  animals, the value of wetlands in  absorbing gases that cause climate change,  and similar 
educational purposes. The operator of the Center shall make special  efforts to bring people, and 
especially students, from disadvantaged communities to the Center for educational purposes. If the 
Wildlife Conservation  Board  determines that all or part of these funds is  not needed to complete this 
project, it may allocate the unneeded part of the funds to the purposes of paragraph (j)  of this section. 

(2)  (A) Of the amount appropriated by paragraph (1), the Wildlife Conservation Board may make a 

grant of up to four million dollars ($4,000,000) to a nonprofit organization whose principal  purpose is 
wildlife conservation to establish a trust fund, the interest from which shall  be used  exclusively to operate 
the Pacific Flyway Center and  bring people from disadvantaged communities to the Center. 

(B) With the approval of the Department of Fish and Wildlife, the nonprofit organization can 

transfer the operation of the Pacific Flyway Center to another nonprofit organization. If such  a transfer 
takes place, the trust fund shall be  transferred to the new nonprofit organization. 

(3)  If the funds allocated by this section are  not all  used to construct the Pacific Flyway Center by 

January 1,  2028,  any remaining funds are appropriated to the Wildlife Conservation  Board  for the 
purposes of Section 86123. 

(v)  Eighty million dollars ($80,000,000) to the Coastal Conservancy for the removal of Matilija Dam, and 
for associated  levee and flood control improvements, water supply improvements, and  related  projects 
on Matilija Creek and the Ventura  River, and for river parkway projects along the Ventura  River. The 
Conservancy may grant all  or part of these funds to Ventura County.  Highest priority for the river parkway 
projects shall  be those which benefit disadvantaged communities.  If the Coastal  Conservancy determines 
that all or part of these funds is not needed to complete this project, it may allocate the unneeded part of 
the funds to the purposes of paragraph (f) of this section. 

(w) The  sum  of twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000) to the University of California for the Natural 
Reserve System for matching grants for land acquisition and for the construction and  development of 
facilities that will be  used for research and training to improve the management of aquatic ecosystems, 
natural lands and  the preservation or conservation of California's wildlife resources. Priority shall  be  given 
to projects that advance research on the impacts of climate change,  reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions, and  adaptation of natural systems to the impacts of climate change. 

(x)  (1) The  sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the Sierra  Nevada 
Conservancy for the purpose of awarding grants within the jurisdiction of the Conservancy to eligible 
entities as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 86166 for the purpose of reducing the threat of wildfires 
which would negatively impact watershed  health. Projects may be for the purp·ose of hazardous fuel 

24 

reduction, postfire watershed rehabilitation, forest management practices that promote forest resilience 
to severe wildfire, climate change, and  other disturbances, and  development of local plans to reduce the 
risk of wildfires that could  adversely affect watershed health. Preference shall be given to grants which 
include matching funds, but this preference may be  reduced  or eliminated for grants which benefit 
disadvantaged communities or economically distressed areas. 

(2) The sum  of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to the 

Department of Forestry and  Fire  Protection for the purpose of awarding grants in areas outside the 
jurisdiction of the Sierra Nevada Conservancy to eligible entities as defined in  subdivision  (a) of Section 
86166 for the purpose of reducing the threat of wildfires which would negatively impact watershed 
health. Projects may be for the purpose of hazardous fuel reduction, postfire watershed  rehabilitation 
and  restoration, forest management practices that promote forest resilience to severe wildfire, climate 
change,  and  other disturbances, and development of local  plans to reduce the risk of wildfires that could 
adversely affect watershed health. Preference shall  be given to grants which include matching funds, but 
this preference may be reduced or eliminated for grants which benefit disadvantaged communities or 
economically distressed areas. 

86083. Consistent with the other requirements of this chapter, funds spent pursuant to this chapter may 
be  used  for grants to eligible entities as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 86166.  Funds awarded to 
eligible entities may be used for projects on land owned by a state or federal agency. With the exception of 
funds allocated to grant programs, funds may also be used  directly by the state agency receiving the 
funds to implement watershed improvement projects consistent with this chapter. In  making grants 
pursuant to this chapter, agencies shall give high priority to applications that include cost sharing, and  to 
grants that benefit disadvantaged communities and  economically distressed areas whether or not they 
include cost sharing. 

86084. (a)  For a project to be  eligible for funding pursuant to this chapter, the project shall have 
watershed protection and  restoration, water supply or water quality benefits, or ecosystem  benefits 
relating to rivers, streams, forests, meadows, wetlands or other water-related resources. 

(b)  (1) Funds appropriated pursuant to this chapter may  be  used for protection and  restoration of forests, 
meadows, wetlands, riparian habitat, coastal resources,  and  near-shore ocean habitat; to acquire land 
and  easements to protect these resources and  avoid development that may reduce watershed health, 
and to take other measures that protect or improve the quality or quantity of water supplies downstream 
from projects funded in whole or in  part by this chapter.  Forest restoration  projects, including but not 
limited to hazardous fuel reduction,  post-fire watershed  rehabilitation, and forest management and tree 
planting using appropriate native plants shall be based  on the best available science  regarding forest 
restoration and  must be  undertaken to protect and  restore ecological values  and to promote forest 
conditions that are  more resilient to wildfire, climate change,  and  other disturbances. 

(2)  Fuel  hazard  reduction activities on United States Forest Service lands in the Sierra  Nevada and 

similar forest types shall  be generally consistent with objectives of the Sierra  Nevada  Watershed 
Improvement Program and the best available science,  including United States Forest Service General 
Technical  Report 220 as  it may be updated. 

86085. Any entity receiving funds pursuant to this chapter that expends funds on private lands shall 
secure an agreement or interest in the private lands to assure the purpose of the expenditure is 
maintained for such time as  is  commensurate with the best practices for the type of project. 

25 


86086. (a)(l) A local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that receives funding for a 
project pursuant to this chapter may use up to twenty percent (20%} of those funds to establish a trust 
fund that is exclusively used  to help pay for the maintenance and  monitoring of that project. 

(2) A local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that acquires an  interest in a 

project with money from this chapter and transfers the interest in the project to another public agency, 
Indian tribe or nonprofit organization shall  also transfer the ownership of the trust fund that was 
established to maintain that interest in the project. 

(3) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(b)  If the local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund 
pursuant to subdivision (a), the agency, tribe or organization shall certify to the state agency making the 
grant that it can  maintain the project to be  undertaken using funds otherwise available to the agency, 
tribe or organization. 

(c)  The interest from the trust fund shall  be  used  only to monitor the implementation of a project, 
and  maintain a project and its water supply and water quality benefits implemented pursuant to this 
chapter. 

(d)  If an  interest in a project is  condemned or if the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit 
organization determines that the interest in the project is  unable to fulfill the purposes for which money 
from this chapter was expended, the trust fund and  any unexpended interest are appropriated and shall 
be  returned to the agency that provided the money. The funds returned to the agency may be  utilized 
only for projects pursuant to this chapter. 

86087. Funds allocated pursuant to this chapter may be  granted to an eligible applicant for single or 
multiple small-scale projects that are consistent with Chapter 6.5 of Division 2 of the Fish  and  Game Code, 
regardless of whether that Chapter is  still in effect. 

86088. By April 30, 2019, the Natural Resources Agency shall  recommend provisions for grant 
approval guidelines to each state agency that receives an  appropriation pursuant to this chapter in 
order to ensure appropriate consistency of the guidelines.  Each  agency shall consider the 
recommendations of the Natural Resources Agency as they adopt their own guidelines. 

86089. Agencies receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall give high priority to projects that 
benefit the native wildlife,  birds and fishes of California. 

CHAPTER  6.2. Land  and Water Management for Water Supply Improvement. 

86090. The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000}  is appropriated from the Fund to the 
Wildlife Conservation Board  for the purpose of awarding competitive grants to eligible entities as defined 
in subdivision (a)  of Section 86166 to improve the quality of public and  private  rangelands, wild lands, 
meadows, wetlands, riparian areas and  aquatic areas for the purpose of increasing groundwater recharge 
and water supply from those lands, and for improving water qualityconsistent with protecting and 
restoring ecological values. 

86091. Funds allocated pursuant to this chapter may be granted to an eligible applicant for single or 
multiple small-scale  projects that are consistent with Chapter 6.5 of Division 2 of the Fish  and  Game  Code, 

26 

regardless of whether that Chapter is  still in effect. 

86094. In  making grants pursuant to this chapter, the Wildlife Conservation  Board shall give highest 
priority to projects which: 

(a)  Are  most cost-effective in producing improved water supply or water quality, and which provide 
the greatest fish  and wildlife benefits. 

{b)  Include matching funds. 

(c)  Benefit disadvantaged communities and economically distressed areas. 

{d)  Are for the purpose of invasive plant control and eradication, restoration of riparian habitat, meadows 
and  wetlands, and other projects that improve the flow of water from the lands, and  reduce the use of 
water by invasive plant species. 

86096. For a project to be  eligible for funding pursuant to this chapter, the project shall have water 
supply or water quality benefits or both. A project that targets the removal of invasive plants to increase 
water supply shall  only be  funded if the applicant guarantees that the land from which plants will be 
removed will be  maintained. 

86097. (a)(l) A local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that receives funding under this 
chapter may use  up to twenty percent {20%) of those funds to establish a trust fund that is exclusively 
used to help pay for the maintenance and  monitoring of the funded project. 

{2)  A local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that undertakes a project with 

money from this division and can  no longer maintain the project shall transfer the ownership of the trust 
fund to another public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that is willing and able to maintain 
that project. 

(3) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(b)  If the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund 
pursuant to subdivision (a), the agency, tribe or organization shall certify to the state agency making the 
grant that it can  maintain the project in an  appropriate condition. 

(c) The interest from the trust fund established from the funds available pursuant to this section shall 
be used only to maintain a project and  its water supply and water quality benefits implemented 
pursuant to this chapter. 

{d)  If the interest in a project is condemned or if the local  public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit 
organization determines that the interest in the project is unable to fulfill the purposes for which money 
from this chapter was expended, the trust fund and any  unexpended interest are appropriated and shall 
be  returned to the Wildlife Conservation  Board. The funds returned may be  utilized only for projects 
authorized by this chapter. 

86098. In implementing this chapter, the Wildlife Conservation Board may provide incentives to 
landowners for conservation actions on private lands or use of voluntary habitat credit exchange 
mechanisms. 

27 

86099. At least ten percent {10%) of the funds available pursuant to this section shall  be  allocated for 
projects that provide a direct benefit to disadvantaged communities. These  benefits may include range 
improvement, among other benefits. These projects may include technical assistance for, outreach to, 
and  engagement with disadvantaged communities. 

CHAPTER  6.3. Conservation Corps. 

86105. The sum  of forty million dollars ($40,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the California 
Conservation Corps for projects to protect, restore, and  improve the health of watershed lands, including 
forest lands, meadows, wetlands, chaparral, riparian habitat and  other watershed lands.  Projects may 
include, but are not limited to, regional  and community fuel hazard  reduction projects on  public lands, 
invasive species  removal, and stream, river,  and  riparian restoration projects. The California Conservation 
Corps shall allocate at least fifty percent (50%) of the funds  pursuant to this section for grants to certified 
local conservation corps. Projects shall improve water quality, water supply reliability, or riparian or 
watershed health. Projects shall  be undertaken in coordination with a nonprofit organization or public 
agency. 

CHAPTER 6.4. Central Valley Fisheries Restoration. 

86106. (a) The  people of California find and  declare that the protection, restoration and  enhancement of 
native fish  populations (including anadromous salmonids) of the Central Valley is necessary for the 
ecological and economic health of the State of California. 

(b)  Fish  need both suitable habitat and appropriately timed flows in rivers and their tributaries. 

(c) The State Water Resources Control Board  shall take note of the funding provided by this chapter and 
the resulting fish  habitat restoration as the Board determines flows necessary to restore Central Valley 
native fish  populations and fisheries. 

(d)  Many state and federal agencies, including the Department of Water Resources,  Department of Fish 
and Wildlife, Delta Stewardship Council,  Delta Conservancy, Wildlife Conservation  Board, Central Valley 
Flood  Protection Board, and federal Bureau  of Reclamation,  United States Fish and  Wildlife Service, and 
National Marine Fisheries Service have prepared  policies and  plans to restore Central Valley native fish 
and fisheries habitat, but these policies and  plans are not fully funded. 

(e)  Many state and federal laws require the restoration of Central Valley native fish  populations and 
fisheries habitat, but funding has not been fully available to carry out the requirements of these laws. 

(f) The sum  of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) is  appropriated from the  Fund to the California 
Natural Resources Agency for the restoration of Central Valley populations of native fish and fisheries 
habitat. 

(1)  (A) The Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency shall  appoint a Central Valley Fisheries 
Advisory Committee made up of representatives from the Central Valley Salmon  Habitat Partnership, 
appropriate local, state and  federal fish  and  water management and other agencies, nonprofit 
organizations, commercial fishing organizations, universities, local agencies and  Indian tribes with 
relevant scientific expertise including representation from the upper watersheds. The committee shall 
advise the Secretary on the annual expenditure of funds appropriated pursuant to this Chapter. The 

28 

committee may solicit projects, and  direct the creation of projects pursuant to this chapter, subject to 
approval by the Secretary. 

(B) The committee shall work closely with representatives from each  river basin in the Central 

Valley, including local government and  water agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit.organizations, to 
develop projects that are most suitable for the conditions in the basin, and which  meet the other 
requirements of this section. 

(C)  In  proposing projects, the committee shall take into account the entire life cycle of the fish 

species to be  benefitted, and  shall  consider the interaction of the effects of each  project within a river 
basin with projects in  other river basins. The committee shall  also consider adverse impacts resulting 
from poor watershed  health, including severe wildfire and  extensive tree mortality. 

(2)  Projects funded pursuant to this section shall  increase self-sustaining populations of native 
fish,  or contribute to an  existing fish  population becoming self-sustaining in the future, with a minimal 
requirement of expenditures to continue to operate the project. No funds may be expended on fish 
hatcheries. 

(3) The committee shall give high priority to projects that provide multiple benefits, such  as 

improved flood management, improved water quality, improved water supply, enhanced groundwater 
sustainability, aquifer remediation and  reduction of emission of greenhouse gases, while also improving 
conditions for native fish species and their habitats. The  committee shall also give high priority to projects 
that can  be integrated into an  existing flow regime  and  provide multi-species benefits over a range of 
flow conditions. The committee shall  also give  high priority to projects that are consistent with recovery 
plan and  resiliency strategies for native California fish species. 

(4)  Expenditures shall  be  for capital outlay projects, such as conservation easements, water 

measurement needed to measure the effects of the project, projects that restore or enhance fisheries 
habitat such  as floodplain expansion, reintroductions of fish  into their historical habitat, improved fish 
passage opportunities, creation or enhancement of spawning and  rearing habitat and other projects. 
Acquisition of land or easements as  part of a fisheries enhancement project must be from willing sellers. 
Project costs shall include the costs of planning, environmental review, mitigation of the impacts of the 
project, and  permitting. High  priority shall  be given to projects that provide adult and juvenile fish  access 
to or fish  passage through agricultural fields or floodplain habitats that will provide enhanced juvenile 
rearing and food  production opportunities. 

(5) Of the funds authorized by this section, the Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency may 

allocate up to ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for one  or more grants for capital outlay and  related 
programmatic purposes to institutions of higher education for facilities that can  be used to improve 
scientific and technical coordination, communication and  training among those institutions, the 
department, the Department of Fish  and Wildlife, the State board and other state agencies to assure that 
developments in  ecosystem and fisheries science and  management are deployed and employed across 
higher education institutions and  state government agencies. 

(g)  Based  on the recommendations of the committee, the Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency may 
make grants to any state or local agency,  Indian tribe, or nonprofit organization to carry out the purpose 
of this section. The Secretary shall give high priority to projects that include matching funds,  projects with 
a local agency as the lead agency,  and  projects supporting proposed actions in the Sacramento Valley 
Salmon Resiliency Strategy (as published  by the California  Natural Resources Agency in June 2017, and  as 

29 


it may be amended), the National Marine Fisheries Service  California Central Valley Steel head Recovery 
Plan and other similar strategies as they are adopted. 

(h)  Of the amount appropriated pursuant to this section, not less than thirty-five million dollars 
($35,000,000) shall  be  available for projects to restore rivers and  streams in support of fisheries and 
wildlife, including, but not limited to, reconnection of rivers with their floodplains,  riparian and side­
channel habitat restoration pursuant to the California Riparian Habitat Conservation  Program, Chapter 
4.1 (commencing with Section  1385) of Division 2 of the Fish  and Game Code, and  restoration and 
protection of upper watershed forests and  meadow systems that are  important for fish  and wildlife 
resources. Subdivision (f) of Section 79738 of the Water Code  applies to this subdivision.  Priority shall  be 
given to projects supported by multi-stakeholder public or private partnerships, or both, using a science­
based  approach and  measurable objectives to guide identification, design, and  implementation of 
regional actions to benefit salmon and steelhead. 

(i) Of the amount appropriated pursuant to this section, five million dollars ($5,000,000) shall be available 
to assist in the development of the Central Valley Salmon  Partnership Habitat Implementation Plan. 

(j) The Secretary shall give high priority to the removal of Dennett Dam  on the Tuolumne River,  if 
additional funds are still needed to complete removal of the Dam. 

(k)  A local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization receiving funding under this chapter may 
use  up to twenty percent (20%) of those funds to establish a trust fund, the proceeds of which shall  be 
used exclusively to pay or help pay for the maintenance and  monitoring of the project being funded. 

(1)  If the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization  is unable to continue to 

maintain and  monitor the project, it may transfer ownership of the trust fund to another public agency, 
Indian tribe or nonprofit organization, with the approval of the Secretary of the Natural Resources 
Agency. 

(2) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(3)  If the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund 

pursuant to paragraph (1), the agency, tribe or organization shall certify to the Secretary of the Natural 
Resources Agency that it can  maintain the project from funds otherwise available to the agency, tribe or 
organization. 

(4)  If all  or part of the project cannot be  maintained or is condemned, the trust fund and any 

unexpended interest are appropriated to the California  Natural Resources Agency. The  funds returned to 
the Agency may be  utilized only for projects pursuant to this chapter. 

(I)  Of the amount appropriated to the California Natural Resources agency pursuant to this section, seven 
million dollars ($7,000,000) is  appropriated to the Department of Fish and Wildlife for native fish 
restoration  projects on the upper Feather River below Oroville dam  for gravel restoration, stream bed 
restoration, and  salmon habitat restoration projects. 

CHAPTER  7. Groundwater Sustainability and Storage. 

86110. (a) The sum of six hundred seventy-five million dollars ($675,000,000) is appropriated from the 
Fund to the department for projects and  programs that support sustainable groundwater management 

30 

consistent with Part 2.74 of Division 6 (commencing with Section 10720). The funds shall  be  used for 
competitive grants that advance sustainable groundwater management through implementation of 
groundwater sustainability plans and  projects that protect, enhance, or improve groundwatersupplies. At 
least ten percent (10%)  of all grants made pursuant to this paragraph shall  be  made to groundwater 
sustainability agencies whose groundwater basins underlie disadvantaged communities. 

(b) The  sum  of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) is  appropriated from the fund to the State board, for use 
by the Office of Sustainable Water Solutions to implement a multidisciplinary technical assistance 
program for small and  disadvantaged communities, and  support the involvement of disadvantaged 
communities and  the public in groundwater sustainability agencies and  in the development and 
implementation of groundwater sustainability plans. 

86111. (a)  Of the funds authorized by section 86110, six  hundred forty million dollars ($640,000,000) shall 
be available for grants to groundwater sustainability agencies implementing groundwater sustainability 
plans pursuant to subdivision (k) of Section 10721 for the following purposes: 

(1) Groundwater recharge and  storage projects including but not limited to acquisition of land 

and groundwater pumping allocations from willing sellers,  planning of facilities such as feasibility studies 
and  environmental compliance, distribution systems, and  monitoring facilities.  No grant made pursuant 
to this section shall exceed twenty million dollars ($20,000,000). 

(2)  Projects that implement groundwater sustainability plans pursuant to Part 2.74 of Division 6 
(commencing with Section 10720). Projects eligible for funding include but are not limited to feasibility 
studies, environmental compliance, engineering work used to develop groundwater use and  sustainable 
yield for specific projects, well use  measurement and innovative decision support tools. 

(3)  Projects that assess and  address saltwater intrusion including future impacts related to 

climate change. 

(4)  Matching grants to groundwater sustainability agencies to develop groundwater sustainability 
plans pursuant to subdivision (k) of Section 10721. No grant shall exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000), 
and  no groundwater sustainability agency shall receive  more than one grant. 

(b)  Of the funds authorized by this section, the sum of five million dollars ($5,000,000) shall be  available 
for research to guide investments made pursuant to this section.  Research activities may include, but are 
not limited to, geophysical surveys, system-level modeling and  analysis, development of novel methods 
and tools that can  be  applicable to local decision-making, cross-sector economic and  policy analysis of 
novel recharge  methods, and  development of new approaches to significantly enhance groundwater 
recharge and fit-for-purpose watertreatment and  reuse. 

(c)  Of the funds authorized by this section, the department may allocate up to ten million dollars 
($10,000,000) for the development of publicly accessible  decision support tools to assist groundwater 
sustainability agencies in conducting drinking water quality analysis, including the development and 
assessment of sustainable yield, undesirable results,  measurable objectives and  other required targets. 
The decision support tools should also support vulnerability assessments to help determine communities 
that may be  at risk of facing water supply or contamination challenges. The  tools should be available for 
other efforts such as  drought vulnerability assessments and shall be  linked to the Human Right to Water 
indicator housed  at the State board. 

31 


(d)  Of the funds authorized by this section, the department may allocate up to five million dollars 
($5,000,000) for one or more grants for capital outlay and  related programmatic purposes to institutions 
of higher education for facilities that can  be  used to improve communication and coordination among 
these institutions, the department and the State board  in order to assure that developments in 
groundwater science and  management are efficiently deployed and  employed across higher education 
institutions and state government agencies. 

(e)  A local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization receiving funding under this section may 
use  up to twenty percent (20%)  of those funds to establish a trust fund  used exclusively to pay or help pay 
for the maintenance and  monitoring of the agency's or organization's interest in  land  acquired pursuant 
to th is· section. 

(1) If the local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization that acquired an  interest in 

land  with money from this section decides to transfer that interest to another public agency, Indian tribe 
or nonprofit organization, the ownership of the trust fund  established to maintain that interest in land 
shall also  be transferred. 

(2) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(3)  If the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund 
pursuant to this subdivision the agency, tribe or organization shall certify to the state agency making the 
grant that it can  maintain the land to be  acquired from funds otherwise available to the agency, tribe or 
organization. 

(4)  If the interest in  land is condemned or if the local public agency,  Indian tribe or nonprofit 

organization determines that the interest in  land is unable to fulfill the purposes for which money from 
this chapter was expended, the trust fund and any unexpended interest are appropriated to the agency 
that provided the money. The funds returned to the agency may be  utilized only for projects pursuant to 
this chapter. 

86112. (a) The department shall give priority for funding pursuant to this chapter to the following in equal 
priority: 

(1) Groundwater basins designated  by the department as critically overdrafted basins, 

groundwater basins which are  in  danger of becoming critically overdrafted, and groundwater basins 
where surface and groundwater are  interconnected. 

(2) Groundwater basins with documented water quality problems, land subsidence, impacts on 

surface streams or groundwater dependent. ecosystems, or other undesirable results as defined by 
subdivision (x)  of Section 10721. 

(3)  Groundwater basins that protect important state-owned resources, such as  state parks and 

wildlife areas. 

(4)  Projects that support the use of floodwaters of acceptable water quality to recharge 

groundwater basins. This  innovative multi-benefit concept brings together four important California 
water management objectives, including flood hazard  reduction, sustainable groundwater 
management, ecosystem restoration, and  water supply reliability. 

32 


(A)  Projects may include adaptive modification of flood and  conservation storage operations 

at reservoirs, modifications to spillway facilities at existing reservoirs, inundation of new or expanded 
flood bypasses or temporary flood storage land areas, application of floodwaters to agricultural lands 
during fallow or dormant seasons, or increased  use of existing groundwater recharge facilities. 

(B)  Projects may include using floodwaters for recharge of groundwater projects, with both 

flood hazard  reduction and groundwater sustainability benefits. 

(C)  Projects that provide benefits in flood hazard  reduction and groundwater sustainability. 

Project feasibility can also be  supported by ecosystem  restoration and water supply benefits. 

(b) Of the amount appropriated in section 86110, the department may use  up to ten million dollars 
($10,000,000) for the following purposes: 

(1) Assess statewide potential for use of floodwaters for recharge and  prioritize locations based 
upon proximity and conveyance connections in the State with flood  hazard reduction and groundwater 
sustainability needs. 

(2) Complete a pilot study of a priority location to demonstrate potential water resources 

management innovations to facilitate flood  hazard reduction and  groundwater recharge. 

(3)  Identify and demonstrate use of analytical tools and  innovative water management 

techniques to support development of available floodwaters and  recharge of groundwater basins. 

(4)  Develop economic monetization techniques of groundwater recharge benefits. 

(5)  Demonstrate application of the department's climate change methodology to both water 

supply and flood management applications. 

(6)  Provide technical assistance to groundwater sustainability and  local flood  management 

agencies,  as well as coordination with state and federal flood agencies. 

(c) The  department shall consider the following criteria  when awarding grants: 

(1) The  potential of the project to prevent or correct undesirable results due to groundwater use. 

(2) The  potential of the project to maximize groundwater storage, reliability,  recharge or 

conjunctive use. 

(3) The  potential of the project to support sustainable groundwater management. 

(4) The annualized cost-effectiveness of the project to achieve the goals of the Sustainable 

Groundwater Management Act, Chapter 2.74 of Division 6 (commencing with Section  10720). 

(d)  Eligible entities as  defined in subdivision (a) of Section 86166, including groundwater sustainability 
agencies, shall  be  eligible for grants.  Priority for funding shall be given to local agencies implementing the 
Sustainable Groundwater Management Act. 

33 

(e)  For purposes of awarding funding under this chapter, a local cost share of not less than fifty percent 
(50%)  of the total cost of the project shall  be  required. The cost-sharing requirement may be  waived or 
reduced for that portion of a project that directly benefits a disadvantaged community or economically 
distressed area, or for projects the majority of whose benefits are to restore ecosystems dependent on 
groundwater. 

(f) No grant may be made unless the Department of Fish  and Wildlife certifies that harm done to fish  or 
wildlife as a result of the project will be mitigated to ensure any potential impacts are  less than 
significant. 

(g)  Eligible projects may include such infrastructure improvements such as  improved canal and  infiltration 
capacity. 

86113. (a)  For purposes of this section, "District" means the Borrego Water District. 

(b) Of the amount appropriated in Section 86110, thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) shall be 
awarded as a grant to the District for the following programs: 

(1)  Acquisition of land and acquisition of the right to pump groundwater from willing sellers to 

reduce groundwater pumping in order to bring groundwater pumping within the boundaries of the 
Borrego Springs Subbasin of the Borrego Valley Groundwater Basin to a level that is  sustainable on  a long­
term basis pursuant to the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act,  Chapter 2.74 of Division 6 
(commencing with Section 10720). Lands acquired may be transferred to the Department of Parks and 
Recreation, a nonprofit organization or another public agency for future management. 

(2) Water end-use efficiency, including urban and agricultural water conservation, and water 

conservation on recreational facilities such as golf courses. 

(3)  Restoration of lands acquired pursuant to this section. 

(4) Stormwater capture for groundwater basin  recharge and  re-use. 

(5) other District projects implementing the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act. 

(c)  (1)  No cost sharing by the District is required to implement this section. This is justified because the 
community of Borrego Springs is a severely disadvantaged community, and  because  excessive 
groundwater pumping can  impact important resources  in Anza-Borrego Desert State Park whose 500,000 
annual visitors contribute an  estimated forty million dollars ($40,000,000) annually to the region, as well 
as support 600 jobs. 

(2) The  District may require cost sharing by beneficiaries when  making grants pursuant 

paragraphs (2) and  (4) of subdivision (b). 

(d)  As a condition of this grant, the District must agree to: 

(1)  Implement measures which assure that lands not presently being irrigated will not come into 

irrigation, and that presently irrigated lands will not become more intensively irrigated; and 

34 

(2)  Require new development to  pay all costs of water purchases the District incurs, and  all costs 

of water projects the District undertakes in order to accommodate that development. 

(e)  (1) The  District or a nonprofit organization that receives funding pursuant to this chapterto acquire an 
interest in  land may use  up to twenty percent (20%) of those funds to establish a trust fund that is 
exclusively used to help pay for the maintenance, monitoring and restoration of that interest in  land. 

(2) The  District or a nonprofit organization that acquires an  interest in  land with money from this 

chapter and transfers the interest in  land to another public agency or nonprofit organization shall also 
transfer the ownership of the trust fund that was established to maintain that interest in land. 

(3) This subdivision does not apply to state agencies. 

(4)  If the District or nonprofit organization does not establish a trust fund  pursuant to this 

subdivision, the agency or organization shall certify to the department that it can maintain the land to be 
acquired from funds otherwise available to the agency or organization. 

(5) If the interest in  land is condemned or if the District or nonprofit organization determines that 
the interest in  land  is unable to fulfill the purposes for which money from this chapter was expended, the 
trust fund and any unexpended interest are appropriated to the District. The  funds returned to the 
District may be  utilized only for projects pursuant to this chapter. 

(f) Any funds not needed  by the District to implement the program described in this section may be 
granted by the District to a nonprofit organization or the California  Department of Parks and Recreation 
to acquire lands adjacent to or in the immediate proximity of Anza-Borrego Desert State  Park to prevent 
development or irrigation of that land which might impact groundwater resources in the Park. These 
lands may be  inside or outside the boundaries of the District, but must be within the boundaries of the 
Borrego Springs Subbasin of the Borrego Valley Groundwater Basin, which is the source of all potable 
water for the Borrego Springs community and visitors to the Park. The  lands may be  used  for wildlife 
habitat. 

(g) The  District may award grants to nonprofit organizations in order to carry out all or part of the 
programs authorized by this section. 

CHAPTER 8.  Water for Wildlife, Pacific Flyway Restoration, and  Dynamic Habitat Management. 

86120. The sum of three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the 
Wildlife Conservation Board  (hereinafter in this section "the Board") to acquire water from willing sellers 
and to acquire storage and delivery rights to improve conditions for fish and wildlife in streams,  rivers, 
wildlife refuges, wetland  habitat areas and  estuaries. High priority shall  be given to meeting the water 
delivery goals of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Title 34 of Public Law  102-575). The  Board 
may arrange for acquisition, long-term lease agreements, or transfer of water rights if it determines such 
actions are  beneficial to wildlife conservation. The  Board  may sell, transfer, or store water or storage 
rights purchased  pursuant to this section, if the Board finds that the sale, transfer or storage will not 
cause  harm to fish and  wildlife. In years when the Board  does not require the water for fish  and  wildlife 
purposes, the Board  may temporarily sell or lease the water or delivery rights. Notwithstanding Section 
13340 of the Government Code, the proceeds of any water sales pursuant to this section by the Board  are 
appropriated directly to the  Board  without regard to fiscal year. The  Board  shall  use the proceeds of the 
sale,  lease or transfer of water or delivery rights to achieve conservation purposes authorized by this 

35 

section. The acquisition of water using funds expended  pursuant to this chapter shall  only be  used for 
projects that will provide fisheries, wildlife or ecosystem benefits. 

86121. The sum of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to the California 
Department of Fish  and  Wildlife for the purpose of improving water supply and water qualityconditions 
for fish  and wildlife on private lands. The California  Department of Fish and Wildlife may provide 
incentives to landowners for conservation actions on private lands or use of voluntary habitat credit 
exchange mechanisms. Such incentives shall be designed to be  appropriately flexible and  responsive to 
the highly variable amounts of water required by fish and wildlife. 

The  Department of Fish and Wildlife shall  use  a portion of the funds provided by this section to develop a 
programmatic authorization to expedite approval of habitat restoration and water quality improvement 
projects not covered  under Chapter 6.5 of Division 2 of the Fish and  Game Code,  and for the 
implementation of that Chapter. 

86122. The sum  of three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to the 
Wildlife Conservation Board for coastal and  Central Valley salmon and steelhead fisheries restoration 
projects. The  Wildlife Conservation  Board  shall give priority to projects that contribute to the recovery of 
salmon and steelhead species  listed pursuant to the state or federal endangered species acts, to enhance 
commercial and recreational salmon fisheries and to achieve the goals of Chapter 8 of Part 1 of Division 6 
(commencing with Section 6900) of the Fish  and  Game Code. 

(a) Of the amount appropriated by this section,  up to one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall  be 
spent for matching grants to local agencies for capital outlay projects to implement programs to improve 
fish  passage opportunities and  to restore anadromous salmonid habitats, particularly juvenile rearing 
habitat for spring run  salmon, on rivers in the Sacramento Valley that have  dams blocking the main stem 
of the river. 

(b) Of the amount appropriated by this section, at least one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall 

be  spent to install fish  screens on the Sacramento and  San Joaquin  Rivers and their tributaries and  in the 

Delta to screen anadromous fish from water intakes.  High priority shall go to projects identified as  high 

priority in the Sacramento Valley Salmon Resiliency Strategy (as published  by the California  Natural 

Resources Agency in June 2017, and as it may be amended). 


86123. (a) The sum  of two hundred eighty million dollars ($280,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to 
the Wildlife Conservation Board for projects to protect migratory birds through habitat acquisition, 
easements,  restoration, or other projects, and to provide water for wildlife refuges and  wildlife habitat 
areas to fulfill the purposes identified in the Central Valley Joint Venture Implementation Plan, as  it may 
be  amended, including: 

(1)  Projects to implement this section which may include conservation actions on private lands. 

(2)  Protection and  restoration of riparian and  wetland  habitat in the Sacramento River Basin. 

(3)  Protection and  restoration of riparian and  wetland  habitat in the San Joaquin and Tulare 

Basins. 

(b) Of the amount appropriated by this section, forty million dollars ($40,000,000) shall  be  deposited in 
the California Waterfowl Habitat Preservation Account established  pursuant to Section  3467 of the Fish 

36 

and Game Code, for the purposes of implementing the California Waterfowl Habitat Program pursuant to 
Article 7 (commencing with Section 3460) of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division 4 of the Fish  and Game Code, 
the California  Landowner Incentive Program of the Department of Fish  and Wildlife, the Permanent 
Wetland  Easement Program of the Wildlife Conservation  Board,  and the establishment or enhancement 
of waterfowl nesting and  other wildlife habitat cover on  fallowed  lands including projects authorized 
pursuant to Section  1018. 

(c)  Of the amount appropriated by this section, ten million dollars ($10,000,000) shall  be  deposited in the 
Shared  Habitat Alliance for Recreational Enhancement (SHARE)  Account established  pursuant to Section 
1572 of the Fish  and  Game Code and  administered by the Department of Fish  and Wildlife for the 
purposes of providing hunting and  other wildlife-dependent recreational opportunities to the public 
through voluntary agreements with private landowners. 

(d) Of the amount appropriated by this section, at least one hundred and ten million dollars 
($110,000,000) shall be expended for acquisition and delivery of water to wildlife refuges, and  associated 
infrastructure projects, to achieve full compliance with the terms of subsection (d) of Section 3406 of the 
Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Title 34 of Public Law 102-575). 

CHAPTER 8.6. Sacramento Region  Water Reliability and  Habitat Protection. 

86124. (a) Ten  million dollars ($10,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the department for grants 
to the Regional Water Authority and to the City of Sacramento on  behalf of the Sacramento Area Water 
Forum for projects that are consistent with the coequal  objectives of the Water Forum Agreement. 
Eligible projects include facilities, studies and other actions to improve flow and  temperature conditions 
and  habitat in the lower American River,  increase water use efficiency and  conservation, or improve the 
integration of surface water and groundwater supplies to provide for dry year water supply reliability. 

(b) The Regional Water Authority and the Water Forum  shall jointly develop and  approve studies, 
projects, or programs to be funded  by the grants.  Highest priority shall  be given to improving water 
temperature conditions in the lower American  River, and  to projects or programs that contribute to both 
of the Water Forum's coequal  objectives of improving water supply and  protecting the environment. The 
Regional Water Authority will be  the grantee for water supply and water efficiency projects. The City of 
Sacramento, on behalf of the Water Forum, will be the grantee for environmental protection, water 
temperature studies, and  habitat restoration projects. 

(c) The amount allocated in aggregate to the package of projects shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of 
the projects' total cost. 

(d)  No funds appropriated pursuant to this section may  be  spent to build new surface storage or raise 
existing reservoirs. 

CHAPTER 9.  Bay Area Regional Water Reliability. 

86125. Two hundred and fifty million dollars ($250,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund  to the 
department for a grant to the group of eight water agencies collectively known as the Bay Area  Regional 
Reliability Partnership (BARR)  for new facilities that extend the benefits of surface water storage for 
region-wide benefits in  any of the following areas:  drought supply reliability, drinking water quality, and 
emergency storage, as generally described in the Final  Mitigation Project List contained in the San 
Francisco  Bay Area  Regional  Reliability Drought Contingency Plan. The Contra Costa  Water District may 

37 

receive the grant on behalf of the Partnership unless the BARR  Partnership has a governance structure in 
place at the time of the grant award that makes its eligible to receive the funds directly. The  participating 
water agencies in the San  Francisco Bay Area  Regional  Reliability Drought Contingency Plan will 
determine and  designate funds to one  or any of the listed projects,  however in  no case will the amount 
determined for any single project be  more than 50% of the project's total cost.  No funds appropriated 
pursuant to this section  may be spent to build  new surface storage, or raise  existing reservoirs. 

CHAPTER 10. Improved Water Conveyance and Water Conservation. 

86126.  Even  though the drought has eased, the effects of the drought are still being felt in many areas 
throughout the state, including the San Joaquin Valley.  Further exacerbating the impact of drought 
conditions on water users were legal requirements restricting pumping from the Sacramento-San Joaquin 
Delta. One of the consequences of both the drought and  pumping restrictions was a significant increase 
in groundwater pumping as a means to replace reduced surface supplies. Such  increase in groundwater 
pumping lowers groundwater tables, which in turn causes wells to go dry and  land to subside, which has 
particularly been  the case  on the east side of the San Joaquin Valley. The  Friant-Kern Canal  has lost 60% 
of its capacity to convey water for both consumptive uses and groundwater recharge.  Unless conveyance 
capacity is restored and  increased, the subsidence will continue to get worse and those local 
communities, including disadvantaged communities, who largely rely on groundwater to serve their 
citizens, will continue to suffer adverse effects. Significant public benefits will result from this state 
investment, including avoiding increased  unemployment, stabilization of groundwater, and securing a 
more stable food supply for California. 

86127. The sum of seven  hundred fifty million dollars ($750,000,000) is  appropriated from the Fund to 
the department for a grant to the Friant Water Authority for water conveyance capital improvements, 
including restored and  increased conveyance capacity to and  in the Madera and Friant-Kern canals, 
resulting in greater groundwater recharge, improved conveyance and  utilization of floodwaters, and  for 
water conservation. Improvements with funds provided  by this paragraph shall be  completed consistent 
with applicable state and federal laws and  contracts. 

86128. The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the 
Natural Resources Agency for actions that support projects defined in  paragraph 11 in the settlement 
agreement to restore the San Joaquin  River referenced  in Section 2080.2 of the Fish  and  Game Code. 
Before expenditure may occur, formal concurrence on  specific projects to be  undertaken is  required  by 
the settling parties to the agreement. 

86129. The diversion of water from Barker Slough to the North Bay Aqueduct adversely impacts listed fish 
species, and  also adversely impacts water quality served to a large urban area. There would be  multiple 
public benefits to relocating the diversion to the North Bay Aqueduct to the Sacramento  River. 

86130. The  sum of five million dollars ($5,000,000} is appropriated from the fund to the department to 
plan for a diversion of water from the Sacramento River to the North Bay Aqueduct to reduce the adverse 
impact on listed fish species,  and  provide a higher quality of drinking water to those served  by the 
Aqueduct. 

CHAPTER 11. Oroville Dam Flood Safety. 

38 


86131. Oroville Dam  provides flood control for the Sacramento Valley. The  inclusion of flood control at 
Oroville Dam  was  not an  obligation of the public water agencies that receive water from Oroville Dam. 
The  flood control function of Oroville Dam was paid for by the federal government. 

86132. The  sum of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the 
department for repair and  reconstruction of the spillways at the Oroville Dam. 

86133. The sum  of twenty-one million dollars ($21,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund  to the 
department. Fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) shall  be spent for Feather River sediment management 
and  removal  between Live Oak and  Verona in coordination with the Sutter Butte Flood Control Agency. 
Six million dollars ($6,000,000) of these funds shall be awarded as a grant to the Sutter Butte Flood 
Control Agency for floodwater attenuation projects at the Oroville Wildlife Area that provide downstream 
flood control  relief and ecosystem restoration. 

86134. The sum  of one million dollars ($1,000,000) is appropriated from the Fund to the department for a 
grant to Butte County for capital outlay projects and  equipment for emergency preparedness 
coordination and  communications consistent with the California Office of Emergency Services 
Standardized  Emergency Management System (SEMS). 

CHAPTER 12. General Provisions. 

86151. (a)  In  projects involving voluntary habitat restoration, water quality improvement and  multi­
benefit floodplain restoration each agency administering provisions of this division shall  encourage 
interagency coordination and  develop and  utilize efficient project approval and  permitting mechanisms, 
including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 6.5 of Division 2 of the Fish and  Game Code 
(regardless of whether that chapter is still in effect) and  programmatic permits for voluntary habitat 
restoration, so  as to avoid  project delays and  maximize the amount of money spent on project 
implementation. 

(b)  Projects designed to primarily protect migratory birds through acquisition, easements,  restoration or 
other projects shall be consistent with the plans and  recommendations established by the federal 
Migratory Bird Joint Venture partnerships that encompass parts of California. 

(c)  Any agency providing funds pursuant to this division to disadvantaged communities or economically 
distressed areas may provide funding to assist these communities in applying for that funding,  including 
technical and  grant writing assistance. These funds may be  provided to nonprofit organizations and  local 
public agencies assisting these communities. 

(d) Any agency receiving funds pursuant to this division may contract for the services ofresource 
conservation districts pursuant to Section 9003 of the Public Resources Code. 

(e) Agencies may count in-kind contributions up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total project cost as 
part of cost sharing. Agencies may count the value of the donated land  in a bargain  sale as part of cost 
sharing. 

(f) Agencies considering proposals for acquisition of lands shall also consider the ability of the proposed 
final  owner of the land to maintain it in  a condition that will protect the values for which itis to be 
acquired, and to prevent any problems that might occur on neighboring lands if the  land is  not properly 
managed. 

39 

(g) Trust funds established  pursuant to this act shall be  managed pursuant to the requirements of the 
Uniform Prudent Management of Institutional Funds Act,  Part 7 (commencing with Section 18501) of 
Division 9 of the Probate Code. 

(h)  Projects designed to primarily protect riparian  habitat through acquisition, easements, restoration or 
other projects shall consider the plans and  recommendations established by the California  Riparian 
Habitat Conservation Program pursuant to Chapter 4.1 of Division 2 of the Fish  and Game Code 
(commencing with Section 1385). 

(i) The administering agency shall  provide advance payment of 50% of grant awards for those projects 
that satisfy both of the following criteria: 

(1) The  project proponent is a disadvantaged community or eligible entity as defined in 

subdivision (a)  of Section 86166, or the project benefits a disadvantaged community. 

(2) The grant award for the project is less than one million dollars ($1,000,000). 

(j)  Eligible grant costs shall include indirect costs as  defined in federal Office of Management and  Budget 
guidelines, as well as  reasonable overhead costs. 

(k)  Agencies receiving funds designated for specific programs or grantees shall expedite the expenditure 
or transfer of those funds with the least amount of process necessary to comply with existing state laws 
and  regulations, and the requirements of this division. It is the intent of this division that the expenditure 
or transfer of funds shall  be efficient, cost-effective, and  expeditious, and generally should occur no later 
than 90 days from demonstrated eligibility by the recipient for the funds requested. 

86152. Agencies shall, to the extent practicable, quantify the amount of water generated for human and 
environmental use  resulting from proposed expenditures they make pursuant to this division. Agencies 
shall, to the extent practicable, quantify the improvement in the quality of water generated for human 
and environmental use  resulting from proposed expenditures they make pursuant to this division. 

86153. To the extent consistent with the other provisions of this division, statewide agencies making 
grants pursuant to this division shall seek to allocate funds equitably to eligible projects throughout the 
state, including northern and southern California, coastal and  inland  regions, and Sierra  and  Cascade 
foothill and  mountain regions. 

86154. Applicants for grants pursuant to this division shall  indicate whether the grant proposal is 
consistent with the local Integrated Regional Water Management Plan,  if one exists.  However, 
consistency with the Integrated Regional Water Management Plan  shall  not be  required as  a condition of 
any grant, and grant proposals shall not be given lower priority if they are  not consistent with Integrated 
Regional Water Management Plans. 

86155. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, a local  public agency with a population of 
less than 100,000 and  a median household income of less than one hundred percent (100%) of the state 
average household income shall  be  required to provide matching funds of no  more than thirty-five 
percent (35%) for a grant for a project entirely within their jurisdiction. State agencies making grants to 
these local public agencies may provide funding in  advance  of construction of portions of the project, if 
the state agency determines that requiring the local public agency to wait for payment until the project is 
completed would  make the project infeasible. 

40 

(b)  Nothing in this section  prohibits a state agency from making a grant to a disadvantaged community or 
economically distressed area that does not require cost sharing. 

86156. Any repayment of loans made pursuant to this division, including interest payments, and interest 
earnings shall be  deposited in the  Fund  and shall be  available solely for the purposes of the chapter or 
section that authorized the loan. 

86157. (a)  Each  state agency that receives an  appropriation of funding made available by this division 
shall  be  responsible for establishing metrics of success and  reporting the status of projects and  all  uses of 
the funding on the state's bond accountability Internet Web site. 

(b)  Each  state agency that receives an  appropriation of funding made available by this division 

shall do the following: 

(1)  Evaluate the outcomes of projects funded  by this division. 

(2) Include in the agency's reporting pursuant to Section 86003 the evaluation described in 

subdivision (a)  of this section. 

(3)  Hold a grantee of funds accountable for completing projects funded by this division on 

time and  within scope. 

86158. (a)  For projects carried out by state agencies pursuant to this division, up to ten percent (10%)  of 
funds allocated for each  program funded by this division may be  expended for planning,  monitoring and 
reporting necessary for the successful  design, selection, and  implementation of the projects and 
verification of benefits. An  eligible entity receiving a grant for a project pursuant to this division may also 
receive sufficient funds for planning, monitoring and  reporting necessary for the successful design, 
selection, and  implementation of the projects. This section shall not otherwise restrict funds ordinarily 
used  by an  agency for "preliminary plans," "working drawings," and  "construction" for a capital outlay 
project or grant project. 

(b)  Permit and  plan  check fees  and  reasonable administrative and  indirect project fees and costs related 
to managing construction shall be  deemed part of construction costs.  Project costs allocated for project 
planning and  design, and  direct and  indirect administrative costs shall  be  identified as separate line items 
in the project budget. 

86159. Notwithstanding Section 16727 of the Government Code, funding provided pursuant to Chapters 6 
and  8 may be  used for grants and  loans to nonprofit organizations to repay financing described in Section 
22064 of the Financial Code  related to projects that are consistent with the  purposes of those chapters. 

86160. Not more than a total offive percent (5%)  of the funds allocated to any state agency under this 
division may be used to pay for its costs of administering programs and  projects specified in this division. 

86161. (a)  Water quality monitoring data shall be collected and  reported to the State board in  a manner 
that is  compatible and  consistent with surface water monitoring data systems or groundwater monitoring 
data systems administered by the State board, consistent with Part 4.9  of Division 6.  Watershed 
monitoring data shall be collected and  reported to the Department of Conservation in  a manner that is 
compatible and  consistent with the statewide watershed program administered by the Department of 
Conservation. 

41 

(bl State agencies making grants or loans pursuant to this division may include specific expenditures for 
compliance with local, state and federal permitting and other requirements. 

(c)  Up to one percent (1%l of funds allocated for each program funded  by this division may be expended 
for research  into methods to improve water supply, water related habitat, and  water quality relevant to 
that program,  in addition to any other amounts provided for in this division. 

86162. (al Prior to disbursing grants or loans pursuant to this division, each  state agency that receives an 
appropriation from the funding made available by this division to administer a grant or loan program 
under this division shall  develop and adopt project solicitation and evaluation guidelines. The guidelines 
shall include monitoring and  reporting requirements and  may include a limitation on  the dollar amount of 
each grantor loan to be awarded. The guidelines shall  not include a prohibition on the recovery of 
reasonable overhead or indirect costs by local public agencies, Indian tribes or nonprofit organizations. 
If the state agency has previously developed and  adopted project solicitation and evaluation guidelines 
that comply with the requirements of this division, it may use those guidelines. Overhead or indirect costs 
incurred by a local public agency, Indian tribe or nonprofit organization are eligible for reimbursement 
and  shall not weigh  negatively in the evaluation of funding proposals pursuant to this division. 

(bl  Prior to disbursing grants or loans, the state agency shall conduct three regional public meetings to 
consider public comments prior to finalizing the guidelines. The state agency shall publish the draft 
solicitation and evaluation guidelines on its website at least 30 days  before the public meetings. One 
meeting shall  be conducted at a location in  northern California, one meeting shall  be conducted at a 
location in the Central Valley of California, and  one meeting shall  be conducted at a location in  southern 
California. Agencies without jurisdiction in  one or more of these three regions may omit the meetings in 
the region or regions within which they do not have jurisdiction. Upon adoption, the state agency shall 
transmit copies of the guidelines to the fiscal committees and the appropriate policy committees of the 
Legislature. 

(c)  At least 45 days prior to soliciting projects pursuant to this division, a state agency administering funds 
pursuant to this division shall  post an  electronic form of the guidelines for grant applicants on  its website. 
Project solicitation and  evaluation guidelines shall only include criteria  based on the applicable 
requirements of this division. 

(d)  Nothing in this division restricts agencies from enforcing and  complying with existing laws. 

86163. Each  project funded from this division shall comply with the following requirements: 

(al The  investment of public funds pursuant to this division will result in  public benefits that address the 
most critical statewide needs and  priorities for public funding, as  determined by the agency distributing 
the funds. 

(bl In the appropriation and  expenditure of funding authorized  by this division, priority will be  given to 
projects that leverage private, federal, or local funding or produce the greatest public benefit. All state 
agencies receiving funds pursuant to this division shall seek to leverage the funds to the greatest extent 
possible,  but agencies shall take into account the limited ability to cost share by small public agencies, 
and  by agencies seeking to benefit disadvantaged communities and  economically distressed areas. 

(c)  A funded project shall  advance the purposes of the chapter from which the project received funding. 

42 

(d)  In  making decisions regarding water resources pursuant to this division, state and  local agencies will 
use the best available science to inform those decisions. 

(e) To  the extent practicable, a project supported by funds  made available by this division will include 
signage  informing the public that the project received funds from the Water Supply and  Water Quality Act 
of 2018. 

(f) To the extent feasible, projects funded with proceeds from this division shall promote state planning 
priorities consistent with the provisions of Section 65041.1 of the Government Code and sustainable 
communities strategies consistent with the provisions of subparagraph  (B)  of paragraph  (2)  of subdivision 
(b) of Section 65080 of the Government Code. 

(g) To the extent feasible, watershed objectives for private lands included in this division should be 
achieved through use of conservation easements and voluntary landowner participation, including, but 
not limited to, the use of perpetual conservation easements pursuant to Division 10.2 (commencing with 
Section 10200) and  Division 10.4 (commencing with Section  10330) of the Public Resources Code, 
voluntary habitat credit exchange mechanisms, and  conservation actions on private lands. 

86164. Funds  provided  by this division shall  not be  expended to pay the costs of the design, construction, 
operation, mitigation, or maintenance of Delta water conveyance facilities. Those costs shall be the 
responsibility of the water agencies that benefit from the design, construction, operation, mitigation, or 
maintenance of those facilities. 

86165. (a) This division does not diminish, impair, or otherwise affect in  any manner whatsoever any area 
of origin, watershed of origin, county of origin, or any other water rights protections, including, but not 
limited to, rights to water appropriated  prior to December 19, 1914, provided  under the law. This division 
does not limit or affect the application of Article 1.7 (commencing with Section 1215) of Chapter 1 of Part 
2 of Division 2, Sections 10505, 10505.5, 11128, 11460, 11461, 11462, and 11463, and Sections 12200 to 
12220, inclusive. 

(b)  For the purposes of this division, an area that utilizes water that has been diverted and conveyed from 
the Sacramento River hydrologic region, for use outside the Sacramento River hydrologic region or the 
Delta, shall  not be deemed to be immediately adjacent thereto or capable of being conveniently supplied 
with water therefrom by virtue or on  account of the diversion and  conveyance of that water through 
facilities that may be constructed for that purpose after January 1,2018. 

(c)  Nothing in this division supersedes,  limits, or otherwise modifies the applicability of Chapter 10 
(commencing with Section 1700) of Part 2 of Division 2,  including petitions related to any new 
conveyance constructed or operated  in accordance with Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 85320)of 
Part 4 of Division 35. 

(d)  Unless otherwise expressly provided, nothing in this division supersedes,  reduces, or otherwise affects 
existing legal protections, both procedural and substantive, relating to the State board's regulation of 
diversion and  use of water, including, but not limited to, water right priorities, the protection provided to 
municipal interests by Sections 106 and  106.5, and changes in  water rights.  Nothing in this division 
expands or otherwise alters the State  board's existing authority to regulate the diversion and  use of water 
or the courts' existing concurrent jurisdiction over California water rights. 

(e)  Nothing in this division shall  be construed to affect the California Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (Chapter 

43 

1.4 (commencing with Section 5093.50) of Division 5 of the Public Resources Code) or the federal Wild 
and Scenic Rivers Act (16  U.S.C. Section 1271 et seq.) and funds authorized pursuant to this division shall 
not be  available for any project that could  have an adverse effect on the values upon which a wild and 
scenic river or any other river is  afforded protections pursuant to the California Wild  and  Scenic Rivers Act 
or the federal Wild and  Scenic  Rivers Act. 

(f) Nothing in this division supersedes, limits, or otherwise modifies the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta 
Reform Act of 2009 (Division 35 (commencing with Section 85000)) or any other applicable law, including, 
but not limited to,  Division 22.3 (commencing with Section 32300) of the Public Resources Code. 

(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any agency or nonprofit organization acquiring land 
pursuant to this division may make use of the Natural Heritage Preservation Tax Credit Act of 2000 
(Division 28 (commencing with Section 37000) of the Public Resources Code).  Funds appropriate pursuant 
to this division that are not designated for competitive grant programs may also  be used for the purposes 
of reimbursing the General  Fund  pursuant to the Natural Heritage Preservation Tax  Credit Act of 2000. 

(h)  Funds provided  pursuant to this division, and  any appropriation or transfer of those funds, shall not be 
deemed to be a transfer of funds for the purposes of Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 2780) of 
Division 3 of the Fish  and  Game Code. 

86166. (a) Applicants eligible to receive grants, loans and contracts pursuant to this division are public 
agencies, state universities (including university-managed national laboratories), resource conservation 
districts, nonprofit organizations, public utilities, mutual water companies, public water systems as 
defined in subdivision (h) of Section 116275 of the Health and Safety Code,  urban water suppliers as 
defined in Section 10617 of the Water Code, federally recognized  Indian tribes, federal agencies owning 
or managing land  in California, and  state  Indian tribes listed on the Native American Heritage 
Commission's California Tribal Consultation List. State agencies granting funds pursuant to this division 
shall give priority to eligible applicants with experience in  planning, designing, and developing the types 
of projects receiving funding from the agencies, or which have access to consulting help in these areas. 

(b)(l) To be eligible for funding under this division, a project proposed  by a public utility that is regulated 
by the Public Utilities Commission, or a mutual water company, shall have a clear and definite public 
purpose and the  project shall benefit the customers of the water system and  not the investors. 

(2) To  be  eligible for funding under this division, an  urban water supplier shall have adopted and 
submitted an  urban water management plan in  accordance with the Urban Water Management Planning 
Act, Part 2.6 (commencing with Section 10610) of Division 6. 

(3) To be  eligible for funding under this division, an  agricultural water supplier shall have adopted 

and submitted an  agricultural water management plan  in accordance with the Agricultural Water 
Management Planning Act, Part 2.8 (commencing with Section 10800) of Division 6. 

(4)  In  accordance with Section 10608.56, an  agricultural water supplier or an  urban water supplier 

is ineligible for grant funding under this division unless it complies with the  requirements of Part 2.55 
(commencing with Section 10608) of Division 6. 

(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, agencies receiving funds pursuant to this 

division may reduce or eliminate cost sharing requirements when making grants of one million dollars 
($1,000,000) or less to nonprofit organizations with budgets less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) if 

44 

the agency determines that such grants would be the most effective way to achieve the purposes of this 
division. 

86167. Where feasible, projects funded  pursuant to this division may use the services of the California 
Conservation Corps or certified community conservation corps, as defined in Section  14507.5 of the 
Public Resources Code.  Public agencies receiving funding under this division shall give additional priority to 
projects that involve the services of the California Conservation Corps or a certified community 
conservation corps, or other nonprofit entities that provide job training and  education opportunities for 
veterans, foster care  recipients, farmworkers or local youth in conservation or restoration  projects. 

86168. Each  state agency that receives an  appropriation of funding made available by this division shall 
be  responsible for establishing and  reporting on the state's bond accountability website each of the 
following: metrics of success,  metrics for benefitting disadvantaged communities and  economically 
distressed areas,  progress in  meeting those metrics, status of projects funded  under this division, and all 
uses of the funding the state agency receives  under this division. The Secretary of the Natural Resources 
Agency shall annually report to the Legislature expenditures made pursuant to this division, and the 
benefits derived from those expenditures. 

86169. The proceeds of bonds issued and sold  pursuant to this division (excluding the proceeds of any 
refunding bonds issued  in accordance with Section 86192) shall  be deposited in the Water Supply 
Reliability and  Drought Protection Fund  of 2018, which is hereby created in the State Treasury. 

86169.1 Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,  moneys in the Water Supply Reliability 
and  Drought Protection Fund of 2018 are continuously appropriated without regard to fiscal year for the 
purposes of this division in the manner set forth in this division. Funds authorized by,  and  made available 
pursuant to this division shall be available and expended only as provided in  this division, and shall  not be 
subject to appropriation or transfer by the Legislature or the Governor for any other purpose. 

86170. Chapter 3.5  (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 ofTitle 2 of the Government 
Code does not apply to the development or implementation of programs or projects authorized or funded 
under this division. 

86171. (a)  Funds  provided by this division shall not be used to support or pay for the costs of 
environmental mitigation, except for the costs of environmental mitigation for projects funded  pursuant 
to this division. 

(b)  Funds  provided  by this division shall be  used for environmental enhancements or other public 
benefits. 

(c)  Notwithstanding paragraphs (a)  and  (b) of this section, the costs of mitigation of the environmental 
impacts directly related and  limited to expenditures under this division may be  paid for by funds provided 
by this division. 

(d)  Funds available pursuant to this division shall not be  expended to pay the costs of the design, 
construction, operation, mitigation, or maintenance of Delta conveyance facilities. 

86172. Every entity implementing this division shall give highest priority to funding projects that combine 
relatively high cost-effectiveness, durability, and  enhanced environmentalquality. 

45 

86174. Acquisitions pursuant to Chapter 6 of this division shall be from willing sellers only. 

86177. The requirement that a project be cost-effective does not require a full  benefit/cost analysis. 

86178. Agencies implementing this division shall give special consideration to projects that employ new 
or innovative technology or practices, including decision support tools that support the integration of 
multiple strategies and jurisdictions, including, but not limited to, water supply, wildfire reduction, 
habitat improvement, invasive weed control, flood control,  land  use,  and sanitation. 

86179. Any contract (including a contract to provide a grant) between a public agency, Indian tribe or 
nonprofit organization and the Department of Fish  and  Wildlife or the Wildlife Conservation  Board for 
work funded pursuant to this division, or pursuant to Division 26.7 shall  be  considered a contract subject 
to the requirements of Section 1501.5 of the Fish and Game Code, and therefor shall  not be considered a 
public work or a public improvement, and  is not subject to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of 
Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code. 

86179.1. Priority shall  be  given to the expenditure of funds on  activities that affect the Delta and the 
species that rely on it that are generally consistent with the report "A Delta  Renewed: A Guide to Science­
Based  Ecological Restoration in the Sacramento-San Joaquin  Delta"  prepared in  2016 by the San  Francisco 
Estuary Institute-Aquatic Science Center. 

86179.2. In the awarding of grants to be made by any agency pursuant to this act or Division 26.7 after 
the effective date of this act, overhead or indirect costs incurred by a local public agency,  Indian tribe or 
nonprofit organization are eligible for reimbursement and shall not weigh negatively in the evaluation of 
funding proposals. Eligible grant costs shall include indirect costs as defined in federal Office of 
Management and  Budget guidelines, as well as  reasonable overhead costs.  For nonprofit organizations, 
grants shall provide for reimbursement of indirect costs by applying the organization's federally 
negotiated indirect cost rate, if one exists. If a negotiated rate does not exist, the organization may elect 
to use  the default indirect cost rate of 10 percent (10%) of its modified total direct costs as defined by the 
Office of Management and  Budget. 

86179.3. No grants made  pursuant to this division shall  result in  an  unmitigated increase in a 
community's exposure to flood hazards or in a net reduction in flood conveyance capacity of any publicly 
owned flood  protection facility. 

86179.4.  In  awarding grants for land acquisition, the Wildlife Conservation  Board  shall give preference to 
organizations that voluntarily pay property taxes. 

CHAPTER 13. Fiscal Provisions. 

86180. (a)  Bonds in the total amount of eight billion eight hundred seventy-seven million dollars 
($8,877,000,000), or so  much thereof as  is  necessary, not including the amount of any refunding bonds 
issued  in  accordance with Section 86192  may be  issued  and  sold to provide a fund  to be  used for carrying 
out the purposes expressed  in this division and to reimburse the General Obligation Bond  Expense 
Revolving Fund  pursuant to Section  16724.5 of the Government Code. The  bonds, when sold, shall  be  and 
constitute a valid  and  binding obligation of the State of California, and the full faith and  credit of the State 
of California  is hereby pledged  for the punctual payment of both principal of, and  interest on, the bonds 
as the principal and  interest become due and  payable. 

45 

(b) The Treasurer shall from time to time sell the bonds authorized by the committee pursuant to Section 
86182.  Bonds shall be sold  upon the terms and  conditions specified in one or more resolutions to be 
adopted by the committee pursuant to Section 16731 of the Government Code. 

86181. The  bonds authorized by this division shall  be  prepared, executed, issued, sold,  paid, and 
redeemed as  provided in the State General Obligation Bond  Law,  and all of the provisions of that law, as 
that law may be  amended, apply to the bonds and to this division and  are hereby incorporated in this 
division as though set forth in full in this division, except subdivisions (a)  and  (b) of Section 16727 of the 
Government Code. 

86182. (a) Solely for the purpose of authorizing the issuance and  sale  pursuant to the State General 
Obligation Bond  Law of the bonds authorized by this division, the Water Supply Reliability and  Drought 
Protection Finance Committee is hereby created.  For purposes of this division, the Water Supply 
Reliability and  Drought Protection  Finance Committee is the "committee" as that term is  used  in the State 
General Obligation Bond Law. 

(b) The finance committee consists of the Director of Finance, the Treasurer, and the Controller. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any member may designate a representative to act as that 
member in  his or her place for all  purposes, as though the member were personally present. 

(c) The Treasurer shall serve as  chairperson of the finance committee. 

(d) A majority of the finance committee may act for the finance committee. 

86183. The  finance committee shall determine whether or not it is necessary or desirable to issue  bonds 
authorized by this division in order to carry out the actions specified in this division and, if so, the amount 
of bonds to be issued and  sold. Successive issues of bonds may be authorized and sold to carry out those 
actions progressively, and  it is  not necessary that all of the bonds authorized to be issued  be sold at any 
one time. 

86184. For purposes of the State General Obligation  Bond  Law,  "board," as defined in Section  16722 of 
the Government Code,  means the Secretary of the Natural ResourcesAgency. 

86185. There shall  be collected each year and  in the same manner and  at the same time as other state 
revenue is collected,  in addition to the ordinary revenues of the state, a sum  in an  amount required to 
pay the principal of, and  interest on, the bonds each year. It is the duty of all officers charged  by law with 
any duty in  regard to the collection of the revenue to do and  perform each  and  every act that is necessary 
to collect that additional sum. 

86186. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, there is  hereby appropriated from the 
General Fund  in the State Treasury,  for the purposes of this division, an amount that will equal the total 
of the following: 

(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and  interest on, bonds issued  and  sold pursuant to 
this division, as the principal and  interest become due  and payable. 

(b) The  sum  that is necessary to carry out the provisions of Section 86189, appropriated without regard  to 
fiscal years. 

47 


86187. The  board may request the Pooled Money Investment Board  to make a loan from the Pooled 
Money Investment Account in  accordance with Section  16312 of the Government Code  for the purpose of 
carrying out this division less any amount withdrawn pursuant to Section 86189. The amount of the 
request shall not exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that the committee has,  by resolution, 
authorized to be  sold  (excluding any refunding bond authorized pursuant to Section 86192) for the 
purpose of carrying out this division. The  board shall execute those documents required  by the Pooled 
Money Investment Board to obtain and  repay the loan. Any amounts loaned shall be  deposited in the 
Fund to be allocated  in accordance with this division. 

86188. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, or of the State General Obligation Bond Law, 
if the Treasurer sells bonds that include a bond counsel opinion to the effect that the interest on the 
bonds is excluded from gross income for federal tax purposes under designated conditions or is otherwise 
entitled to any federal tax advantage, the Treasurer may maintain separate accounts for the bond 
proceeds invested and for the investment earnings on those proceeds, and  may use  or direct the use of 
those proceeds or earnings to pay any rebate, penalty, or other payment required under federal law or 
take any other action with respect to the investment and  use of those  bond  proceeds, as may be  required 
or desirable under federal law in order to maintain the tax-exempt status of those bonds and  to obtain 
any other advantage under federal law on behalf of the funds of this state. 

86189. For the purposes of carrying out this division, the Director of Finance may authorize the 
withdrawal from the General  Fund  of an  amount or amounts not to exceed the amount of the unsold 
bonds that have been  authorized by the committee to be  sold (excluding any refunding bond authorized 
pursuant to Section 86192) for the purpose of carrying out this division less any amount borrowed 
pursuant to Section 86187. Any amounts withdrawn shall  be deposited in the Fund. Any moneys made 
available under this section shall be  returned to the General Fund, with interest at the rate earned by the 
moneys in the Pooled Money Investment Account, from proceeds received from the sale  of bonds for the 
purpose of carrying out this division. 

86190. All  moneys deposited in the Fund that are derived from  premium and  accrued  interest on bonds 
sold  pursuant to this division shall  be  reserved  in the Fund  and shall be  available for transfer to the 
General Fund  as a credit to expenditures for bond  interest, except that amounts derived from premium 
may be reserved and  used to pay the cost of bond issuance prior to any transfer to the General Fund. 

86191. Pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law, the cost of bond  issuance shall be  paid  out of 
the bond  proceeds,  including premiums, if any. To  the extent the cost of bond issuance is not paid from 
premiums received from the sale of bonds, these costs shall  be  shared proportionately by each  program 
funded through this division by the applicable bond sale. 

86192. The  bonds issued  and  sold pursuant to this division may be  refunded  in  accordance with Article 6 
(commencing with Section  16780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code, 
which is  a part of the State General Obligation Bond  Law.  Approval by the voters of the state for the 
issuance of the bonds under this division shall include approval of the issuance of any  bonds issued  to 
refund any bonds originally issued  under this division or any previously issued  refunding bonds. Any bond 
refunded  with the proceeds of refunding bonds as authorized  by this section  may be  legally defeased to 
the extent permitted by law in  the manner and to the extent set forth in the resolution,  as amended from 
time to time, authorizing such  refunded bonds. 

86193. The  proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this division are  not "proceeds of taxes" as 
that term  is used  in  Article XIII  B of the California Constitution, and the disbursement of these proceeds is 

48 

not subject to the limitations imposed by that article. 

SECTION 2. Section 1 of this act shall take effect immediately upon approval by the voters of the Water 
Supply and Water Quality Act of 2018, as set forth in that section at the November 6,  2018, statewide 
general election. In  order to fund a water supply reliability and  drought protection program  at the 
earliest  possible  date,  it  is  necessary  that this  act  take  effect  immediately. 

SECTION 3.  Conflicting Provisions. 

(a) The provisions and intent of the Water Supply and Water Quality Act of 2018 shall  be given 
precedence over any state law, statute, regulation or policy that conflicts with this section, and the policy 
and  intent of this act shall prevail over any such contrary law, statute, regulation or policy. 

(b)  If this division is approved by the voters, but superseded by any other conflicting ballot division 
approved by more voters at the same election, and the conflicting ballot division is later held invalid, it is 
the intent of the voters that this act shall  be given the full force of law. 

(c)  If any rival or conflicting initiative regulating any matter·addressed by this act receives the higher 
affirmative vote, then all non-conflicting parts of this act shall becomeoperative. 

SECTION 4. If any provision of this act or the application thereof is held  invalid, that invalidity shall  not 
affect other provisions or applications of this act that can  be given effect without the invalid provisions or 
applications, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. 

SECTION 5. 

Section 2799.7 is added to the Fish  and  Game Code to read: 

2799.7. Subdivision (f) of Section 2787 does not apply to Section 2795.  Notwithstanding other provisions 
of this article and Section  13340 of the Government Code,  as  of July 2, 2020 funds transferred pursuant to 
Section 2795 shall be continuously appropriated to the  Wildlife Conservation Board for purposes of 
Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 86120) of Division 38 of the WaterCode. 

SECTION 6. 

Part 12 is added to Division 6 of the Water Code to read: 

Section 11860. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law (including Section 13340 of the 
Government Code and Sections 39710 through 39723 of the Health and Safety Code), the fees paid, the 
cost of compliance instruments acquired, and the increased cost of power purchased  by the Department 
of Water Resources,  hereafter "Department," as a result of the implementation of Division 25.5 of the 
Health and Safety Code are continuously appropriated to the Department from the Greenhouse Gas 
Reduction  Fund, as defined in  Section  16428.8 of the Government Code, and the fees paid, the cost of 
compliance instruments acquired and the increased cost of power purchased  by the  Metropolitan Water 
District of Southern California (Statutes 1969, chapter 209, as  amended), hereafter "District," as a result 
of the implementation of Division 25.5 of the Health and  Safety Code are continuously appropriated to 
the District from the Greenhouse Gas  Reduction  Fund,  as defined in Section  16428.8 of the Government 
Code. 

49 

(b) The  funds appropriated to the Department pursuant to this section shall  be expended within the State 
Water Resources  Development System, and  on consumer water conservation programs within the 
jurisdiction of the State Water Resources Development System. 

(c) The funds appropriated to the District pursuant to this section shall  be expended within the water 
storage, treatment, conveyance, and distribution system of the District and on  consumer water 
conservation programs within the jurisdiction of the District. 

(d) Of the consumer water conservation programs authorized by subdivisions (b) and  (c), highest priority 
shall  be  given to those benefitting disadvantaged communities (as defined subdivision (a)  of Section 
79505.5, as  it may be amended) and  economically distressed areas  (as  defined in subdivision (k) of 
Section 79702, as it may be amended). 

(e)  All expenditures pursuant to this section shall meet the requirements of Chapter 4.1 of Part 2 of 
Division 26 of the Health and  Safety Code. The  Department and  District will provide an  annual report to 
the Air Resources  Board  on the prior-year's project implementation along with a plan for current year 
implementation. 

(f) No funds provided  by this part shall be expended to pay the costs of the design, construction, 
operation, mitigation, or maintenance of new Delta water conveyance facilities. No funds provided by this 
section shall  be expended to pay the costs of construction of new surface water storage facilities or to 
expand the capacity of the California Aqueduct or the Colorado River Aqueduct. Those costs shall  be the 
responsibility of the water agencies that benefit from the design, construction, operation, mitigation, or 
maintenance of those facilities. 

(g)  All  reasonable  and feasible measures shall  be taken to reduce, avoid, or mitigate significant negative 
environmental impacts from  projects undertaken pursuant to this section. 

Section 11861. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law (including Section 13340 of the 
Government Code and Sections 39710 through 39723 of the Health and Safety Code), the fees paid, the 
cost of compliance instruments acquired, and  the increased cost of power purchased by the Contra Costa 
Water District, hereafter "District," as a result of the implementation of Division 25.5 of the Health and 
Safety Code are continuously appropriated to the District from the Greenhouse Gas  Reduction  Fund,  as 
defined in  Section 16428.8 of the Government Code, and  the fees paid,  the cost of compliance 
instruments acquired and the  increased cost of power purchased  by the San  Luis and  Delta Mendota 
Water Authority hereafter "San  Luis Authority," as  a result of the implementation of Division 25.5 of the 
Health and  Safety Code  are continuously appropriated to the San  Luis Authority from the Greenhouse Gas 
Reduction Fund,  as  defined in Section 16428.8 of the Government Code. 

(b)  (1) The funds appropriated to the Contra Costa Water District pursuant to this section shall be 
expended within the boundaries of the District, and  on consumer water conservation programs within the 
District. 

(2) The funds appropriated to the San  Luis Authority pursuant to this section shall be  expended 
within the water storage, treatment, conveyance, and  distribution system of the San  Luis Authority and 
on water conservation, water quality improvement, water treatment, water supply and  similar water 
programs within the jurisdiction of the Authority. 

(c)  Of the funds appropriated pursuant to subdivision (b),  highest priority shall  be  given to those  projects 

50 

benefitting disadvantaged communities (as  defined subdivision (a)  of Section 79505.5, as it may be 
amended) and  economically distressed areas (as  defined in subdivision (k) of Section 79702, as  it may be 
amended). 

(d) All  expenditures pursuant to this section shall meet the requirements of Chapter 4.1 of Part 2 of 
Division 26 of the Health and  Safety Code. The  District and San  Luis Authority will  provide an  annual 
report to the Air Resources Board on the prior-year's project implementation along with a plan for 
current year implementation. 

(e) All  reasonable and feasible  measures shall  be  taken to reduce, avoid, or mitigate significant negative 
environmental impacts from projects undertaken pursuant to this section. 

51 


