Initiative Coordinator 
Office of-the Attorney General 
1300 I Street, 17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

17-0003 


RECEIVED 

FEB  2 7 2017 

INJTIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 

Initiative Constitutional Amendment Proposal on Gender Identity Liberty And Freedom 

The undersigned hereby respectfully requests and submits the initiative measure set forth 
below that the Attorney General's Office prepare a circulating title and summary for the 
proposed initiative measure.: 
follows: 

The full  text of the initiative measure is as 

"CALIFORNIA CONSTITUTION 

ARTICLE  1  DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 


SEC. 32.  Free exercise and enjoyment of gender identity without discrimination 
or preference are guaranteed.  This liberty of conscience does not excuse acts that 
are licentious or inconsistent with the peace or safety of the State. The Legislature 
shall make no law respecting an establishment of gender identity A person is not 
incompetent to be a witness or juror because of his or her own gender identity." 

The undersigned further hereby certifies and states, in accordance with the provisions of 
Sections 9001  and 9608 of the California Elections Code, as follows: 

"I, Ashley Illma Gore, declare under penalty of perjury that I am a citizen of the United 
States, 18 years of age or older, and a resident of the County of Los Angeles, 
California." 

"!,Ashley Illma Gore, acknowledge that it is a misdemeanor under state law (Section 
18650 of the Elections Code) to knowingly or willfully allow the signatures on an 
initiative petition to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the proposed 
measure for the ballot. I certify that I will not knowingly or willfully allow the signatures 
for this initiative to be used for any purpose other than qualification of the measure for 
the ballot." 

text  of  the  proposed  initiative  measure,  are  reproduced  on  the 
For  reference,  the  full 
accompanying  pages.  A  check  for  the  applicable  fee  of $2,000,  made  payable  to  the  State  of 
California, is  also enclosed. If you have any questions, please contact me by e-mail  or by phone 
number provided below. 

Ashley Illma Gore I ashley@illmagore.com 
Ashley Illma Gore I 310-425-5044 

~ ·  

Ashley Illma Gore 
Dated this 23 dday  of 02  ,20  17 

17-0003 

submitted on  February 23,  2016 by Ashley lllma Gore 

GENDER IDENTITY LIBERTY AND FREEDOM ACT 
An act to review Article I, Section 4. of the California Constitution and to add Section 32. to the 
California Constitution, relating to the establishment and freedom of liberty of the conscience. 

CALIFORNIA CONSTITUTION 

ARTICLE I  DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 

SEC. 4.  Free exercise and enjoyment of religion without discrimination or 
preference are guaranteed.  This liberty of conscience does not excuse acts that 
are licentious or inconsistent with the peace or safety of the State.  The 
Legislature shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion. A person is 
not incompetent to be a witness or juror because of his or her opinions on 
religious beliefs. 

FULL TEXT OF INITIATIVE PROPOSAL 

ARTICLE I  DECLARATION OF RIGHTS 

SEC. 32.  Free exercise and enjoyment of gender identity without discrimination 
or preference are guaranteed.  This liberty of conscience does not excuse acts that 
are licentious or inconsistent with the peace or safety of the State. The Legislature 
shall make no law respecting an establishment of gender identity A person is not 
incompetent to be a witness or juror because of his or her own gender identity." 

