September 26, 2017 

Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

Dear Ms.  Johansson: 

RECEIVED 

SEP  2 6 2017 

1.NITIATIVB COO~Af'OO 

ATTORNEY OEMEMVj Qffl~ 

Pursuant to Elections Code Section 9002 (b )( 1), this letter is to request that the Attorney General 
prepare a title and summary for the Teacher Fair Pay Act using the amended language that is 
enclosed. 

Should you have any questions, please contact us at: 

Great Teachers, Better Schools 
c/o California Trust for Public Schools 
12400 Ventura Blvd. #363. 
Studio City, CA 91604-2406 
Phone:  213·,973-2877 
Email:  info@fairpay2018.com 

Thank you for your assistance. 

Sincerely, 

MARC LITCHMAN 

Enclosed: 

Amended text of the Teacher Fair Pay Act 

Great Teachers, Better Schools ID#1395304 

12400 Ventura Blvd. #363 Studio City,  CA  91604 

213.973.2877 info@fairpay.com 

www.fairpay2018.com 

- 1 7  ·~  0  0  2  1 Arndt.#? 

INITIATIVE MEASURE TO BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

The Attorney General of California has prepared the following circulating title and summary of 

the chief purpose and points of the proposed measure: 

(Here set forth the unique.numeric identifier provided by the Attorney General and circulating 

title and summary prepared by the Attorney General. Both the Attorney General's unique numeric 
identifier and the circulating title and summary must also be printed across the top of each page of the 
petition whereon signatures are to  appear.) 

· 

TO THE HONORABLE CALIFORNIA SECRETARY OF STATE 

We the undersigned, registered, qualified voters of California, residents of 

County, 

hereby propose amendments to the Education Code and the Revenue and Taxation Code, relating to 
teachers, and petition the Secretary of State to submit the same to  the voters of California for their 
adoption or rejection at the next succeeding statewide general election or as  otherwise provided by law. 
The proposed statutory amendments read as follows: 

· 

SECTION 1.  The people of State of California find and declareall of the following: 
(a)  An effective teacher is the single most important factor in the education of a child. It is 

therefore crucial that our schools recruit and retain high-quality teachers. 

(b)  The future  of California's economy, today the 6th largest in the world, is built on an educated 

and highly skilled workforce 

(c)  Over the next ten years  100,000 California teachers are expected to retire. 
(d)  Rigorous national standards and higher standards for student perfonnance haye raised the 

demand for talented teachers, yet new teachers leave the profession at a rate six times greater than other 
public employees, and fifty percent faster than police officers, firefighters, and other first responders. 

(e)  Annual pink slips, layoffs, and teacher pay that lags severtteen percent behind similar 

professions have discouraged the best and brightest from pursuing a career in teaching. 

(f)  The number of college graduates preparing to become teachers has plummeted by seventy­

six percent over the last decade. 

(g)  Students with effective teachers are more likely to  earn higher salaries, attend college,  and 

save more for retirement, and are less likely to drop out, use drugs, join gangs, engage in ~riminal 
activity, or become teenage parents. 

(h)(l) Therefore, it is  the intent of the of this measure to  establish the California Achievement 

Trust Fund, the purposes of which are all of the following: 

(A)  To recruit and retain the most qualified individuals possible to teach in our schools, 
especially in the areas of science,· technology, engineering, mathematics, and special education. 

(B)  To supplement, not replace, existing.state and local funding.  It is not the intent of this 

measure that moneys from the California Achievement Trust Fund be used to fund school district or 
county office of education bureaucracy, or contribute to,  or defray, the cost of existing, or future, 
administrative programs. 

(C)  To pay teachers salaries that are competitive with the private sector and similar public sector 

professions and that are commensurate with today 's teacher responsibilities and future educational 
demands. 

Amended 9.26.2017 

SEC. 2.  Section 45028.5 is added to  the Education Code, to read: 
45028.5. (a)(l) In no case shall a full-time teacher, who has been issued a clear credential by the 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing, be paid less than a non-leadership member of the 
· California State Legislature. For purposes of this subdivision,  the  salary paid to the teacher shall not 
include a calculation that involves any per diem payments that may be made to  a member of the 
California State Legislature. 

(b) All revenues received 'pursuant to Sections 6051.9 and 6201.9 of the Revenue and Taxation 

Code shall be deposited into the California Achievement Trnst Fund, which is hereby created in the 
State Treasury. The moneys in the fund shall only be available, upon appropriation by the Legislature, to 
the State Department of Education for allocation to school districts and county offices of education for 
purposes of paying any enhanced teacher salaries required pursuant to this section. 

SEC. 3.  Section 6051.9 is  added to the Revenue and Taxation Code, to read: 
6051.9. (a) In addition to the taxes imposed by Section 6051  and any other provision of this part, 
for the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers 
at the rate of two percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal 
property sold at retail in this state on and after January  1, 2020. 

(b) All revenues, less refunds, received pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the State 

Treasury to the credit of the California Achievement Trnst Fund, as  established pursuant to  subdivision 
(b)  of Section 45028.5  of the Education Code. 

SEC. 4.  This act may be amended to further its purposes by statute, passed in each house of the 
Legislature by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring and signed 
by the Governor. 

SEC.  5.  This act shall become operative on January  1,  2020. 
SEC. 6.  The provisions of this act are severable. If any provision of this act or its 


application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can 

be given effect without the invalid provision or application. 


-0­

Amended 9.26.2017 

