1  7  - 0  0  1  8  Amal # 

} 

Timothy Draper 

2882 Sand Hill Rd.  #150 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 

( 650) 233-9000 

Email:  Tim@draper.com 

September 7, 201 7 

Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
State of California 
PO Box 994255 
Sacramento, CA 94244-25550 

RECEIVED 

SEP  13  2017 

INITIATNE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Re: 

Amendment of Proposed Initiative No.  17-0018: "Three New States Within the 
Current Boundaries of California" 

Dear Initiative Coordinator: 

With this letter I submit an amendment to the above-referenced proposed statewide 

initiative measure in accordance with Elections Code section 9002.  I am the proponent of the 
measure and a registered voter in the State of California.  Please prepare a circulating title and 
summary of the measure using the amended language as provided by law. 

Enclosed with this letter please find the text of the proposed measure as amended. 

Thank you for your attention to processing my request. 

Timothy Draper 

1 7  - 0  0  1  8 

Arndt.  :If:  I 

INITIATIVE  MEASURE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO  VOTERS 

SECTION 1. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS 

A.  California is the nation's most populous state, nearly six 
times larger than the average population of the fifty states. 
However, much of the state's population is concentrated in 
certain urban and coastal areas, particularly in Southern 
California. 

B.  California is the nation's third largest state by geography, 
over two times larger than the average of the fifty states, with 
enormous and diverse economies, including agriculture, 
energy, technology, and entertainment. 

C. As a consequence of these and other socio-economic factors, 
political representation of California's diverse population and 
economies has rendered the state nearly ungovernable. 
Additionally, vast parts of California are poorly served by a 
representative government dominated by a large number of 
elected representatives from a small part of our state, both 
geographically and economically. 

D.  It is not surprising that efforts to divide the state have been 
· part of its history for over one hundred years. In fact, voters 
overwhelmingly approved the splitting of California into two 
states in 1859, but Congress never acted on that request due to 
the Civil War. 

E. The citizens of the whole state would be better served by 
three smaller state governments while preserving the 
historical boundaries of the various counties, cities, and towns. _ 

SECTION 2. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 

A. The people, acting as the legislative body of the State of 
California pursuant to their reserved legislative power 
provided by the California Constitution, hereby: 

(1) Establish new boundaries for three new states within the 
boundaries of the State of California; 

(2) Establish a procedure for the transformation of the single 
State of California into three new states; and 

(3) Provide the legislative consent for the formation of three 
new states to Congress as required by the United States 
Constitution. 

SECTION 3. LEGISLATIVE CONSENT FOR THE CREATION OF 
THREE NEW STATES WITHIN THE CURRENT BOUNDARIES 
OF CALIFORNIA. 

Article 3.1 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Title 1 ( commencing 
~ith Section 173) of the Government Code is added to read: 

§ 173(a) Upon enactment of this section, the legislative consent 
required by Section 3 of Article IV of the United States 
Constitution for the creation of three (3) states within the 
current boundaries of the State of California, as provided by 
Article 3 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Title 1, is given by the 
people. 

(b) The boundaries of the three (3) new states shall be as 
follows: 

(1) A new state, named Northern California, or a name to be 
chosen by the people of that state, shall include the territory 
represented by the boundaries of the following forty ( 40) 
counties:  Alameda, Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa, 

Contra Costa, Del  Norte, El Dorado, Glenn, Humboldt, Lake, 
Lassen, Marin, Mariposa, Mendocino, Merced, Modoc, Napa, 
Nevada, Placer, Plumas, Siskiyou, Shasta, Tehama, Trinity, 
Tuolumne, Sacramento, San Joaquin, San Francisco, San Mateo, 
Santa Clara, Santa Cruz, Sierra, Solano, Sonoma, Stanislaus, 
Sutter, Yolo and Yuba. 

(2) A new state, named California, or a name to be chosen by 
the people of that state, shall include the territory represented 
by the following six ( 6) counties: Los Angeles, Monterey, San 
Benito, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara and Ventura. 

(3) A new state, named Southern California, or a name to be 
chosen by the people of that state, shall include the territory 
represented by the following twelve (12) counties: Fresno, 
Imperial, Inyo, Kern, Kings, Madera, Mono, Orange, Riverside, 
San Bernardino, San Diego, and Tulare. 

( c)  On January 1, 2019, the Governor shall transmit a copy of 
the certified election results enacting this Article to Congress, 
with a request that Congress act upon the consent of the 
people within twelve (12) months. 

§ 17 4( a)  Upon enactment of this section the California State 
Legislature shall provide for the division and transformation of 
California.  If the State Legislature fails to reach resolution of 
such matters within twelve (12) months of congressional 
assent to the division of the state, the debts of the State of 
California shall be distributed among the newly created states 
based on the population of the new states proportionately to 
the whole population of California at the time of Congressional 
action, and the assets within the boundaries of each newly 
created state shall become the assets of that new state. 

(b) The legal relationship between the counties and the State of 
California shall continue until the organization and 

establishment of a separate government in a newly created 
state, including the adoption of a Constitution by convention or 
popular vote within each newly created state. 

SECTION 4. GENERAL PROVISIONS 

(a) If any provision of this Act, or part thereof, is for any reason 
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions 
shall not be affected, but shall remain in full force and effect, 
and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable. 

(b) This Act is intended to be comprehensive. It is the intent of 
the People that in the event this Act and measures relating to 
the same subject shall appear on the same statewide election 
ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures shall 
be deemed to be in conflict with this Act.  In the event that this 
Act receives a greater number of affirmative votes, the 
provisions of this Act shall prevail in their entirety, and all 
provisions of the other measure or measures shall be null and 
void. 

