By Hand Delivery 

September 8, 2017 

To:  The Office of the Attorney General 
Attn: Ashley Johansson, Initiative Coordinator 
1300 "I" Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

1  7  - 0  0  1  5  Arndt#  1 

RECEIVED 

SEP  13  2017 

INITIATIVE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE

Re: 

Submission of Amendment to the 
Kidney Dialysis Patient Protection Act (No.  17~0015) 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

On August 9, 201 7 the proponents of a proposed statewide initiative titled "Kidney 

Dialysis Patient Protection Act" (the "Initiative") submitted a request that the Attorney General 
prepare a circulating title and summary pursuant to Article II,  Section 10( d) of the California 
Constitution.  Pursuant to Elections Code §9002(b ), the proponents hereby submit timely 
amendments to the text of the Initiative.  As the proponents of the Initiative, we approve the 
submission of the amended text to the Initiative and we declare that the amendments are 
reasonably germane to the theme, purpose, and subject of the Initiative.  We request that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary using the amended Initiative. 

Please continue to direct all inquiries and correspondence regarding this proposed 

initiative to: 

BJ Chisholm 
Altshuler Berzon LLP 
177 Post Street, Suite 300 
San Francisco, CA 94108 
Phone: 415-421-7151 
Email: bchisholm@altber.com 

·~  /
~n  "~ 
~enThcey  V 

J!. 

I 

Enclosure: Amended initiative language 

1  7  - 0  0  1  5  Amdt#  ) 

This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with the provisions of 

Article II,  Section 8, of the California Constitution. 

This initiative measure amends and adds sections to the Health and Safety Code; 

therefore, existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed in strikeout type and new 
provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new. 

SEC.l.  Name 

This act shall be known as the "Kidney Dialysis Patient Protection Act." 

SEC. 2.  Findings and Purposes 

A. 

The People make the following findings: 

(1)  Kidney dialysis is a process where blood is cleaned of waste and excess water, 

usually through a machine outside the patient's body, and then returned to the patient. If 
someone who needs dialysis cannot obtain or afford high quality care, toxins build up in the 
body, leading to death. 

(2)  In California, at least 66,000 Californians undergo dialysis treatment. 

(3)  Just two multinational, for-profit corporations operate or manage nearly three­
quarters of dialysis clinics in California and treat almost 70 percent of dialysis patients in 
California.  These two multinational corporations annually earn billions of dollars from their 
dialysis operations, including almost $400 million each year in California alone. 

(4)  Because federal law mandates that private health insurance companies offer and pay 
for dialysis, private insurance companies have little ability to bargain with the two multinational 
dialysis corporations on behalf of their customers. 

(5)  Thus, for-profit dialysis corporations charge patients with private health insurance 
four times as much as they charge Medicare for the very same dialysis treatment, resulting in 
vast profits. 

(6)  In a market dominated by just two multinational corporations, California must ensure 

that dialysis is fairly priced and affordable. 

(7)  Other states have taken steps to protect these very vulnerable patients from these two 

multinational corporations, including by enacting common sense protections such as minimum 
staffing requirements. 

(8)  Current staffing levels in dialysis clinics in California are possibly dangerous and are 

inadequate to protect patient health against avoidable deaths, hospitalizations, infections, and 
medication errors. 

1 

(9)  Efforts to enact protections for kidney dialysis patients in California have been 

stymied in Sacramento by the dialysis corporations, which spent over $600,000 in just the first 
six months of 2017 to influence the California Legislature. 

B. 

Purposes: 

(1)  It is the purpose of this Act to ensure that outpatient kidney dialysis clinics provide 

quality and affordable patient care to people suffering from end stage renal disease. 

(2)  This Act is intended to be budget neutral for the State to implement and administer. 

SEC. 3.  Section 1226.4 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1226. 4  (a)  Minimum staffing requirements. 

(1)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall ensure that the following minimum staffing ratios are met at 
all times that patients are receiving,  or preparing to receive,  direct clinic care: 

(A)  At least one nurse is providing direct clinic care for every eight patients. A nurse shall only 
count toward this ratio during time periods the nurse has no responsibilities other than direct 
clinic care.  A nurse manager or charge nurse shall not count toward the nurse-to-patient ratio. 

(B)  At least one hemodialysis technician is providing direct clinic care for every three patients. 
A hemodialysis technician shall only count toward this ratio during time periods the 
hemodialysis technician has no responsibilities other than direct clinic care.  Hemodialysis 
technician trainees shall not count toward this ratio.  Nurses counted toward the nurse-to-patient 
ratio shall not count toward the hemodialysis technician-to-patient ratio. 

(2)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall ensure that no more than  75 patients per full-time equivalent 
schedule are assigned at any time to any individual social worker and to any individual 
registered dietitian,  regardless ofthe location where patient care is provided. 

(3)  The ratios described in paragraphs (1)  and (2)  shall constitute the minimum number of 
nurses,  hemodialysis technicians,  social workers,  and registered dietitians assigned to patients. 
Additional nurses,  hemodialysis technicians,  social workers,  and registered dietitians shall be 
assigned to the extent necessary to ensure that the staff-to-patient ratio is appropriate to the 
level ofdialysis care given and meets the needs ofpatients. 

(4)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall ensure that the transition time between patients at a treatment 
station is no shorter than 45 minutes, provided that the department may by regulation set a 
minimum transition time other than 45 minutes ifsuch modification is supported by changes in 
available clinical evidence regarding minimum transition times necessary to ensure safety and 
hygiene protocols in chronic dialysis clinics,  including but not limited to changes in 
recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regarding standard 
hygiene practices. 

(5)  The requirements ofthis subdivision shall take effect on March 31,  2019. 

(b)  Inspections for safety and hygiene. 

2 

The  department shall inspect each chronic dialysis clinic for which a license has been issued at 
least once per year,  and shall conduct such inspections as often as necessary to ensure the 
existence ofand compliance with adequate hygiene and sanitation protocols,  compliance with 
this chapter,  and the adequacy ofthe quality ofcare being provided. 

(c)  Licensing,  recordkeeping,  and reporting. 

(1)  It shall be a condition oflicensure that a chronic dialysis clinic comply with this section,  and 
the department shall not renew,  transfer,  or extend any license issued to a chronic dialysis clinic 
except upon a showing that the chronic dialysis clinic complies with the requirements of 
subdivision (a).  The  department shall not issue a license to any new chronic dialysis clinic unless 
that chronic dialysis clinic demonstrates the ability and intention to  comply with the 
requirements ofsubdivision (a). 

(2)  Every chronic dialysis clinic for which a license has been issued shall maintain,  andprovide 
to the department on a form prescribed by the department,  at a minimum,  the following 
information: 

(A)  Actual staffing ratio and transition time data for the period covered by the submission, 
which shall include,  at a minimum,  daily totals ofthe total number and actual hours worked by 
nurses and hemodialysis technicians; the total number ofpatients and actual hours receiving 
direct clinic care; the daily average transition time for each treatment station; and, for each 
week,  the total number offull-time equivalent social workers and registered dietitians and the 
total number ofpatients assigned to social workers and registered dietitians. 

(B)  Every instance,  no matter how brief during the period covered by the submission when 
staffing ratios or transition times did not satisfy the requirements ofsubdivision (a),  and the 
reasons and circumstances therefor. 

(3)  The  chiefexecutive officer or administrator ofthe chronic dialysis clinic shall certify under 
penalty ofperjury that he or she is satisfied,  after review,  that all information submitted pursuant 
to paragraph (2)  is accurate and complete. 

(4)  The  chronic dialysis clinic shall periodically submit such information described in 
paragraph (2)  to the department on a schedule and in a format prescribed by the department, 
provided that the clinic shall submit that information  no less frequently than four times per year. 

(d)  Complaints andpatient rights. 

(1)  Within  60 days ofreceiving a complaint from a patient,  an association ofpatients, a family 
member ofa patient,  an employee,  an association ofemployees,  a vendor,  or a contractor ofa 
chronic dialysis clinic that the chronic dialysis clinic has violated any requirement ofthis 
chapter,  the department shall investigate the chronic dialysis clinic and,  ifthe evidence shows a 
violation has occurred,  the department shall impose discipline pursuant to Section 1240.1. 

(2)  To  ensure that all health care workers ofchronic dialysis clinics are entitled to 
whistleblower protections,  Section 1278.5 shall apply to  chronic dialysis clinics,  and to the 

3 

extent ofthat application,  references in Section 12 7 8. 5 to a health facility shall be deemed to be 
references to a chronic dialysis clinic,  subject to paragraph (3). 

(3)  Notwithstanding Section 1417.2,  moneys collected under paragraph (3)  ofsubdivision (b)  of 
Section 1278.5 from a chronic dialysis clinic shall be distributed to  the department to implement 
and enforce laws governing chronic dialysis clinics. 

(e)  Protection ofconfidential information. 

(1)  The department shall redact from any writing,  record,  or document submitted or created 
pursuant to  this section that is a public record within the meaning ofsubdivision (e)  ofSection 
6252 ofthe Government Code all personal identifying or confidential information associated 
with any patients,  to the extent required to prevent an unwarranted invasion ofpersonal privacy, 
as that term is used in subdivision (c)  ofSection 6254 ofthe Government Code,  but the 
department shall not withhold any such writing,  record,  or document in  its entirety under 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 6254 ofthe Government Code. 

(2)  Information required to be submitted under subdivision (c),  and complaints submitted under 
subdivision (d),  shall not be withheld on the basis ofsubdivision (I)  ofSection 6254 ofthe 
Government Code. 

(I)  Definitions. 

For purposes ofthis section: 

(1)  "Administrator" means the administrator as that term is used in Section 494. l 80(a) a/Title 
42 ofthe Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(2)  "At all times" includes times during which clinic personnel,  including but not limited to 
nurses or hemodialysis technicians,  are provided meal periods and rest or other breaks.  No 
clinic personnel may be counted toward the required ratios during times they are taking such 
breaks or meal periods. 

(3)  "Charge nurse" means a charge nurse as described in Section 494.140(b)(3) ofTitle 42 of 
the Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(4)  "Chiefexecutive officer" means the chiefexecutive officer as that term is used in Section 
494.180(a) a/Title 42 ofthe Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(5)  "Direct clinic care" means initiating and discontinuing dialysis,  monitoring patients during 
treatment,  and administering medications,  and physical presence in the immediate area where 
patients are dialyzed. 

(6)  "Full-time equivalent" means employment by a chronic dialysis clinic for 2,080 hours of 
work in 12 consecutive months. 

(7)  "Nurse" means a registered nurse licensed pursuant to  Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 
2700) ofDivision 2 ofthe Business and Professions Code. 

4 

(8)  "Nurse manager"  means a nurse manager as described in Section 494.140(b)(l) ofTitle  42 
ofthe Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(9)  "Registered dietitian" means a dietitian as described in Section 494.140(c) ofTitle 42 ofthe 
Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(10)  "Social worker"  means a social worker as described in Section 494.140(d) ofTitle  42 of 
the Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(11)  "Hemodialysis technician" means a person who holds both ofthe following qualifications: 

(A)  The person is a patient care dialysis technician,  as described in Section 494.140(e) ofTitle 
42 ofthe Code ofFederal Regulations as it read on December 31,  2016. 

(B)  The person is a Certified Hemodialysis Technician certified pursuant to Article 3. 5 
(commencing with Section 1247) ofChapter 3 ofDivision 2 ofthe Business and Professions 
Code. 

(12)  "Hemodialysis technician trainee" means a person who is undergoing training to become a 
hemodialysis technician,  but who has not yet been certified as a Certified Hemodialysis 
Technician pursuant to Article 3.5 (commencing with Section 1247) ofChapter 3 ofDivision 2 of 
the Business and Professions Code. 

(13)  "Transition time "  means the period oftime beginning when one patient leaves a treatment 
station and ending when the next patient is placed in the treatment station,  but does not mean the 
period oftime after the last patient ofthe day leaves the treatment station. 

(14)  "Treatment station "  means a physical location within a chronic dialysis clinic where an 
individual patient is dialyzed. 

SEC. 4.  Section 1240.1  is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1240.1  (a)  The  department may assess an administrative penalty against a chronic dialysis 
clinic for a violation ofthis chapter.  Each penalty issued pursuant to this chapter shall be 
classified as a major violation,  an intermediate violation,  or a minor violation based on the 
nature ofthe violation and the threat ofharm to patients. A major violation shall be subject to an 
administrative penalty ofup to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000),  an intermediate 
violation shall be subject to an administrative penalty ofup to twenty thousand dollars 
($20,  000),  and a minor violation shall be subject to an administrative penalty ofup to  two 
thousand dollars ($2,000). 

(b)  The department shall promulgate regulations establishing the criteria to assess an 
administrative penalty against a chronic dialysis clinic,  which shall include,  but not be limited 
to,  consideration ofall ofthe following: 

(1)  The probability and severity ofthe risk that the violation presents to the patient. 
(2)  The  actual harm to patients,  ifany. 

(3)  The nature,  scope,  and severity ofthe violation. 

5 

(4)  The  chronic dialysis clinic's history ofcompliance with related state andfederal statutes and 
regulations,  including,  but not limited to,  the similarity in circumstances ofthe violation to any 
previous violation by the chronic dialysis clinic within a 24-month period. 

(5)  Factors beyond the control ofthe chronic dialysis clinic that restrict its ability to comply 
with this chapter or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 

(6)  The  demonstrated willfulness ofthe violation. 

(7)  The  extent to which the chronic dialysis clinic detected the violation and took immediate 
action to correct the violation and to prevent that type ofviolation from recurring. 
(c)  Ifa chronic dialysis clinic disputes a determination by the department regarding an alleged 
deficiency or failure to correct a deficiency,  or the reasonableness ofa proposed deadline for 
correction ofa violation or an amount ofan administrative penalty,  the chronic dialysis clinic 
may, within 10 working days,  request a hearing pursuant to Section 131071. A  chronic dialysis 
clinic shall pay all administrative penalties when all appeals have been exhausted and the 
department's position has been upheld. 

(d)  For purposes ofArticle 9 (commencing with Section 12650) ofChapter 6 ofPart 2 of 
Division 3 ofTitle 2 ofthe Government Code,  the information required to be provided under 
subdivision (c)  ofSection 1226.4 shall be deemed material to  any claim for payment submitted 
by a chronic dialysis clinic within twelve months ofthe submission ofinformation. 

SEC. 5.  Section 1240.2 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1240.2.  (a)  Subject to subdivision (d),  prior to  the  effective date ofregulations adopted to 
implement Section 1240.1,  ifa chronic dialysis clinic receives a notice ofdeficiency constituting 
an immediate jeopardy to the health or safety ofa patient and is required to submit a plan of 
correction,  the department may assess the licensee an administrative penalty ofup to one 
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).  In determining the amount ofthe penalty,  the department 
shall consider the severity and duration ofthe  immediate jeopardy and the extent to which the 
conduct causing the immediate jeopardy could have been avoided. 
(b) Ifa licensee disputes a determination by the department regarding an alleged deficiency or 
the alleged failure to correct a deficiency,  or regarding the reasonableness ofthe proposed 
deadline for correction or the amount ofthe penalty,  the licensee may,  within 10 days,  request an 
administrative hearing pursuant to Section 131071.  Penalties shall be paid when appeals have 
been exhausted and ifthe department's position has been upheld. 

(c) For purposes ofthis section  "immediate jeopardy" means a situation in which the licensee's 
noncompliance with one or more requirements oflicensure has caused,  or is likely to cause, 
serious injury or death to one or more patients. 

6 

(d)  This section shall only apply to  incidents occurring on or after January 1,  2019,  except that 
this section shall only apply to violations ofsubdivision (a)  ofSection 1226.4 occurring on or 
after March 31,  2019. 

(e)  Notwithstanding Section 11  ofthe act that added this section,  new regulations are not 
required or authorized for implementation ofthis section. 

(f)  This section shall become inoperative on the effective date ofregulations promulgated by the 
department pursuant to Section 1240.1. 

SEC. 6.  Section 1226. 7 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1226. 7.  (a)  Reasonable limits on charges for patient care by chronic dialysis clinics; rebates of 
amounts charged in  excess offair treatment payment amount. 

(1)  For purposes ofthis section,  the  "fair treatment payment amount" shall be an amount equal 
to  115 percent ofthe sum ofall direct patient care services costs and all health care quality 
improvement costs incurred by a governing entity and its chronic dialysis clinics. 

(2)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2019,  a governing entity or its chronic 
dialysis clinics shall annually issue rebates to payers as follows: 

(A)  The governing entity shall calculate the  "unfair excess charged amount," which shall be the 
amount,  ifany,  by which treatment revenue from treatments provided by all ofthe governing 
entity's chronic dialysis clinics exceeds the fair treatment payment amount. 

(B)  The governing entity or its chronic dialysis clinics shall,  on a pro rata basis based on the 
amounts paid and reasonably estimated to be paid,  as those amounts are included in treatment 
revenue,  issue rebates to payers (other than Medicare or other federal,  state,  county,  city,  or 
local government payers) in amounts that total the unfair excess charged amount. 

(C)  The governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic shall issue any rebates required by this 
section no less than 90 days and no more than 210 days after the end ofits fiscal year to which 
the rebate relates. 

(D)  Where,  in any fiscal year,  the rebate the governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic must 
issue to a single payer is less than twenty dollars ($20),  the governing entity or chronic dialysis 
clinic shall not issue that rebate,  and shall provide to other payers in accordance with 
subparagraph (B)  the total amount ofrebates not issued pursuant to this subparagraph. 

(E)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2020,  any rebate issued to a payer shall 
be issued together with interest thereon at the rate ofinterest specified in subdivision (b)  of 
Section 3289 ofthe Civil Code,  which shall accrue.from the date ofpayment by the payer. 

(3)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2019,  a governing entity shall maintain 
and provide to the department,  on a form and schedule prescribed by the department,  a report of 
all rebates issued under paragraph (2),  including a description ofeach instance during the 

7 

period covered by the submission when the rebate required under paragraph (2)  was not timely 
issued in full,  and the reasons and circumstances therefor.  The  chiefexecutive officer or 
principal officer ofthe governing entity shall certify under penalty ofperjury that he or she is 
satisfied,  after review,  that all information submitted to the department under this paragraph is 
accurate and complete. 

(4)  In  the event a governing entity or its chronic dialysis clinic is required to  issue a rebate 
under this section,  no later than 210 days after the end ofits fiscal year the governing entity 
shall pay a penalty to the department in an amount equal to five percent ofthe unfair excess 
charged amount, provided that the penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars 
($100,000).  Penalties collected pursuant to this paragraph shall be  used by the department to 
implement and enforce laws governing chronic dialysis clinics. 
(5)  Ifa chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity disputes a determination by the department to 
assess a penalty pursuant to this subdivision or subdivision (b),  or the amount ofan 
administrative penalty,  the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity may,  within 10 working 
days,  request a hearing pursuant to Section 131071. A chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity 
shall pay all administrative penalties when all appeals have been exhausted and the 
department's position has been upheld. 
(6)  Ifa governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic proves in any court action that application of 
this section to the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity will,  in any particular fiscal year, 
violate due process or effect a taking ofprivate property requiring just compensation under the 
Constitution ofthis State or the Constitution ofthe  United States,  the provision at issue shall 
apply to the governing entity or chronic dialysis clinic,  except that as to the fiscal year in 
question the number  "115" whenever it appears in the provision at issue shall be replaced by the 
lowest possible whole number such that application ofthe provision to  the governing entity or 
chronic dialysis clinic will not violate due process or effect a taking ofprivate property requiring 
just compensation.  In any civil action,  the burden shall be on the governing entity or chronic 
dialysis clinic to propose a replacement number and to prove that replacing "115 '' with any 
whole number lower than the proposed replacement number would, for the fiscal year in 
question,  violate due process or effect a taking ofprivate property requiring just compensation. 

(b)  Compliance reporting by chronic dialysis clinics. 

(1)  For each fiscal year starting on or after January 1,  2019,  a governing entity shall maintain 
and submit to the department a report concerning the following information for all ofthe chronic 
dialysis clinics the governing entity owns or operates in California-

(A)  the number oftreatments performed; 

(B)  direct patient care services costs; 

(C)  health care quality improvement costs; 

(D)  treatment revenue,  including the difference between amounts billed but not yet paid and 
estimated realizable revenue; 

8 

(E)  the fair treatment payment amount; 

(F)  the unfair excess charged amount; 

(G)  the amount,  ifany,  ofeach payer's rebate, provided that any individual patient shall be 
identified using only a unique identifier that does not reveal the patient's name or identity; and 

(H)  a list ofpayers to whom no rebate was issued pursuant to subparagraph (D)  ofparagraph 
(2)  ofsubdivision (a)  and the amount not issued, provided that any individual patient shall be 
identified using only a unique identifier that does not reveal the patient's name or identity. 

(2)  The  information required to be maintained and the report required to  be submitted by this 
subdivision shall each be independently audited by a certified public accountant in accordance 
with the standards ofthe Accounting Standards Board ofthe American Institute ofCertified 
Public Accountants,  and shall include the opinion ofthat certified public accountant as to 
whether the information contained in the report fully and accurately describes,  in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles in the  United States,  the information required to 
be reported under paragraph (1). 

(3)  The governing entity shall annually submit the report required by this subdivision to the 
department on a schedule,  in a format,  and on a form prescribed by the department, provided 
that the governing entity shall submit the information no later than 210 days after the end ofits 
fiscal year.  The  chiefexecutive officer or other principal officer ofthe governing entity shall 
certify under penalty ofperjury that he or she is satisfied,  after review,  that the report submitted 
to the department under paragraph (1)  is accurate and complete. 

(4)  In the event the department determines that a chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity 
failed to maintain the information or timely submit a report required under paragraph (1)  ofthis 
subdivision or paragraph (3)  ofsubdivision (a),  or that the amounts or percentages reported by 
the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity under paragraph (1)  ofthis subdivision were 
inaccurate or incomplete,  or that any failure  by a chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity to 
timely issue in full a rebate required by subdivision (a)  was not substantially justified,  the 
department shall assess a penalty against the chronic dialysis clinic or governing entity not to 
exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000).  The  department shall determine the amount of 
the penalty based on the severity ofthe violation,  the materiality ofthe inaccuracy or omitted 
information,  and the strength ofthe explanation,  ifany, for the violation.  Penalties collected 
pursuant to this paragraph shall be used by the department to implement and enforce laws 
governing chronic dialysis clinics. 

(c)  Definitions. 

For purposes ofthis section: 

(1)  "Direct patient care services costs" means those costs directly associated with operating a 
chronic dialysis clinic in California and providing care to patients in California.  Direct patient 
care services costs shall include,  regardless ofthe location where each patient undergoes 
dialysis,  only (i)  salaries,  wages,  and benefits ofnon-managerial chronic dialysis clinic staff, 

9 

including all clinic personnel who furnish direct care to dialysis patients, regardless ofwhether 
the salaries,  wages,  or benefits are paid directly by the chronic dialysis clinic or indirectly 
through an arrangement with an affiliated or unaffiliated third party,  including but not limited to 
a governing entity,  an independent staffing agency,  a physician group,  or a joint venture between 
a chronic dialysis clinic and a physician group;  (ii)  stafftraining and development;  (iii) 
pharmaceuticals and medical supplies;  (iv) facility costs,  including rent,  maintenance,  and 
utilities; (v)  laboratory testing; and (vi)  depreciation and amortization ofbuildings,  leasehold 
improvements, patient supplies,  equipment,  and information systems.  For purposes ofthis 
section,  "non-managerial chronic dialysis clinic staff" includes all clinic personnel who furnish 
direct care to dialysis patients,  including nurses,  technicians and trainees,  social workers, 
registered dietitians,  and non-managerial administrative staff, but excludes managerial staff 
such as facility administrators.  Categories ofdirect patient care services costs may be further 
prescribed by the department through regulation. 

(2)  "Governing entity" means a person, firm,  association, partnership,  corporation,  or other 
entity that owns or operates a chronic dialysis clinic for which a license has been issued,  without 
respect to whether the person or entity itselfdirectly holds that license. 

(3)  "Health care quality improvement costs" means costs,  other than direct patient care services 
costs,  that are related to  the provision ofcare to chronic dialysis patients and that are actually 
expended for goods or services in California that are required to  maintain,  access or exchange 
electronic health information,  to support health information technologies,  to train non­
managerial chronic dialysis clinic staffengaged in direct patient care,  and to provide patient­
centered education and counseling.  Additional costs may be  identified by the department through 
regulation, provided that such costs are actually spent on services offered at the chronic dialysis 
clinic to chronic dialysis patients and are spent on activities that are designed to  improve health 
quality and to  increase the likelihood ofdesired health outcomes in ways that are capable of 
being objectively measured and ofproducing verifiable results and achievements. 

(4)  "Payer" means the person or persons who paid or are financially responsible for payments 
for a treatment provided to  a particular patient,  and may include the patient or other individuals, 
primary insurers,  secondary insurers,  and other entities,  including Medicare and any other 
federal,  state,  county,  city,  or other local government payer. 

(5)  "Treatment" means each instance when the chronic dialysis clinic provides services to  a 
patient. 

(6)  "Treatment revenue" for a particular fiscal year means all amounts actually received and 
estimated realizable revenue for treatments provided in that fiscal year.  Estimated realizable 
revenue shall be calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,  and 
shall be a reasonable estimate based on (i)  contractual terms for patients covered under 
commercial healthcare plans with which the governing entity or clinics have formal agreements; 
(ii) revenue from Medicare,  Medicaid,  and Medi-Cal based on rates set by statute or regulation, 
and estimates ofamounts ultimately collectible from government payers,  commercial healthcare 
plan secondary coverage, patients,  and other payers; and (iii)  historical collection experience. 

10 

SEC. 7.  Section 1226.8 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1226.8  (a)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall not discriminate with respect to  offering or providing 
care,  and shall not refuse to offer or provide care,  to patients on the basis ofthe payer for 
treatment provided to a patient,  including but not limited to  on the basis that the payer is a 
patient, private payer or insurer,  Medi-Cal, Medicaid,  or Medicare. 

(b)  A chronic dialysis clinic shall not terminate,  abridge,  modify,  or fail to perform under any 
agreement to provide services to patients covered by Medi-Cal,  Medicaid,  or Medicare on the 
basis ofrequirements imposed by this chapter. 

SEC. 8.  Section 1266.3 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read: 

1266. 3.  It is the intent ofthe People that California taxpayers not be financially responsible for 
implementation and enforcement ofthe Kidney Dialysis Patient Protection Act.  In order to 
effectuate that intent,  when calculating,  assessing,  and collecting fees imposed on chronic 
dialysis clinics pursuant to Section 1266,  the department shall take into account all costs 
associated with implementing and enforcing Sections 1226.4,  1226. 7,  1226.8,  1240.1,  or 1240.2. 

SEC. 9.  Section 1228 of the Health and Safety Code is amended to read: 

1228.  (a)  Except as provided in subdivision (c), every clinic for which a license or special 
permit has been issued shall be periodically inspected. The Except as provided in Section 1226.4, 
the frequency of inspections shall depend upon the type and complexity of the clinic or special 
service to be inspected. Inspections shall be conducted no less often than once every three years 
and as often as necessary to ensure the quality of care being provided. 

(b)  (1)  During inspections, representatives of the department shall offer any advice and 
assistance to the clinic as they deem appropriate. The department may contract with local health 
departments for the assumption of any of the department's responsibilities under this chapter. In 
exercising this authority, the local health department shall conform to the requirements of this 
chapter and to the rules, regulations, and standards of the department. 

(2)  The department shall reimburse local health departments for services performed pursuant to 
this section, and these payments shall not exceed actual cost. Reports of each inspection shall be 
prepared by the representative conducting it upon forms prepared and furnished by the 
department and filed with the department. 

(c)  This section shall not apply to any of the following: 

(1)  A rural health clinic. 

11 

(2)  A primary care clinic accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations (JCAHO), the Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC), 
or any other accrediting organization recognized by the department. 

(3)  An ambulatory surgical center. 

(4)  An end stage renal disease facility. 

A comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility that is certified to participate either in the 
Medicare program under Title XVIII (42 U.S.C. Sec.  1395 et seq.) of the federal Social Security 
Act, or the medicaid program under Title XIX (42 U.S.C. Sec.  1396 et seq.) of the federal Social 
Security Act, or both. 

(d)  Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of subdivision ( c ), the department shall retain the authority to 
inspect a primary care clinic pursuant to Section 1227, or as necessary to ensure the quality of 
care being provided. 

SEC.  10.  Nothing in this act is intended to affect health facilities licensed pursuant to 
subdivision (a), (b), or (f) of Section 1250 of the Health and Safety Code. 

SEC.  11.  The State Department of Public Health shall issue regulations necessary to implement 
this act no later than 180 days following its effective date. 

SEC.  12.  Pursuant to subdivision ( c) of Section 10 of Article II of the California Constitution, 
this Act may be amended either by a subsequent measure submitted to a vote of the people at a 
statewide election; or by a statute validly passed by the Legislature and signed by the Governor, 
but only to further the purposes of the Act. 

SEC.  13.  The provisions of this act are severable. If any provision of this act or its application is 
held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications that can be given 
effect without the invalid provision or application. 

12 

