17-00 30 


RECEIVED 

SEP  O 5 2017 

JNITIATIVE COORDINATOR

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

Ms. Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
1300 I Street 
Sacramento, California 95814 

August 30, 2017 

Re:  Request for title and summary 

Dear Ms. Johansson: 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 10( d) of the California Constitution, this letter requests that the 
Attorney General prepare a circulating title and summary of the chief purpose and points of the 
enclosed ballot initiative:  "California Parental Rights Act of 2018."  Also enclosed are the 
required signed statements per California Elections Code, and a check in the amount of $2,000. 

Please direct all inquiries and correspondence regarding this proposed initiative to the 
undersigned. 

Sincerely, 

Lee Olson 
Chairman 
Committee to End Slavery 
16458 Bolsa Chica Street, #165 
Huntington Beach, CA  92649 

Enclosures:  Initiative language, Certifications and check 

17-0030
 

SECTION 1.  Title.  This measure shall be known and may be cited as the "California Parental 
Rights Act of2018." 

SECTION 2.  Findings and Declarations 

A.  The Committee to End Slavery makes the following findings: 

(1)  The responsibility for the raising of children lies solely with parents, or legal 
guardians, in accordance with our Creators command given to parents, not the 
government, to "Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not 
depart from it." 

(2)  The government has immorally usurped, at gun point, the Creator endowed 
inviolable right of parents to control the education oftheir children. 

(3)  The government has used its powers of coercion not only to usurp the Creator 
endowed inviolable parent's rights but also to promote immoral teachings contrary to the 
way the Creator has said the child should go. 

(4)  The government schools reject abstinence from sexual activity outside the bounds of 
marriage and teach that fornication is not only okay but it's expected. 

(5)  The government schools teach that homosexual behaviors are morally acceptable and 
should be praised, contrary to the Creator's instructions for healthy living, by idolizing 
and establishing Harvey Milk Day honoring a man known primarily for his homosexual 
exploits rather than any good done for the public.  In addition, government schools have 
established a Day of Silence which is a Leftist political event, is a propaganda event 
designed and is intended to eradicate conservative moral beliefs about volitional 
homoerotic acts and/or to make it socially impossible to express them, and it's disruptive 
to the educational environment and process. 

(6)  Government schools have a full court press on to eradicate Judeo-Christian moral 
principles from any discourse in the lives of California residents. 

(7)  Government school promotion of immoral sexual behaviors, especially fornication 
and homosexuality, has resulted in the highest syphilis rates in decades, quadrupling in 
15 years according to the CDC, with the majority of new infections in gay and bisexual 
men causing the L.A.-based AIDS Healthcare Foundation to erect billboards warning of a 
"Syphilis Tsunami," and causing L.A. County public health workers to actively search 
for people who may have the disease.  Also according to the CDC 2015 STD Fact Sheet, 
20 million new STDs occur every year with half among those 15-24 years old.  This 
drives almost $16 billion in health care costs.  Based upon 2008 data the CDC estimates 

that 110 million Americans have STDs at any given time.  That's an astounding 1 out of 
every 3 Americans ( or roughly 1 out of every 2 adults over the age of 18). 

(7)  Parents who understand that the path to life consists of following Judeo-Christian 
moral principles revealed by our Creator are increasingly seeking alternative educational 
options such as private and home schools where their children will not be indoctrinated in 
secular humanism, or any other ism, that violates Judeo-Christian moral principles nor 
will they have their morals corrupted by the moral degeneracy which is the essence of 
government school education. 

SECTION 3.  Purpose and Intent. 

A.  To establish in the California Constitution the inviolable right of parents, or legal 

guardians, to have absolute and sole control ofthe education of their children without 
interference from or threats of coercion by any level of government. 

SECTION 4.  The California Parental Rights Act of 2018.  Section 17 is added to Article IX of 
the California Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 17. 

(a) This Act shall be known as the "California Parental Rights Act of 2018." 

(b) Notwithstanding any provision of the Constitution to the contrary, the 
parents, or legal guardian, shall have the inviolable right of sole authority and 
responsibility to "train up their child, or ward, in the way the child should go" 
including, but not limited to, the venue, the curriculum and the methods and 
this authority and responsibility shall not be usurped by any local, county, State 
or other State sanctioned governmental entity. 

SECTION 5.  Proponent Standing. Notwithstanding any other provision oflaw, ifthe State, its 
government agencies, or any of its officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this measure 
following its approval by the voters, any other government employee, any proponent, or, in their 
absence, any citizen of this state shall have the authority to intervene in any court action 
challenging the constitutionality ofthis measure for the purpose of defending its 
constitutionality, whether such action is in trial court, on appeal, or on discretionary review by 
the Supreme Court of California or the Supreme Court of the United States. The fees and costs of 
defending the action shall be a charge on funds appropriated to the Attorney General, which shall 
be satisfied promptly. 

