The Committee To Support A University Of California Online Constitutional Amendment 

Boyd Roberts 

1 7  - 0  0  2  5  Arndt.# 

www.UCOCA.org 

ID# 1373815 

237 San Joaquin Street 
Laguna Beach, CA 92651 

Boyd@Laguna Gallery RealEstate.com 

RECEIVED 

OCT  o2 2017

INITIATNE COORDINATOR 

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE 

October 2, 2017 

Ashley Johansson 
Initiative Coordinator 
Office of the Attorney General 
13 00 I Street,  17th Floor 
Sacramento, CA 95814 

RE:  1 7 - 0025 Revision 

Dear Ms. Ashley Johansson, 

Plea?t!?  p(e pcu<3_
j  '  f- Ie 
111 
~ 

tt.. i4-j  "?!CA  111  r(lu..  r7 
lo $,@c'

<f, VI.  C 

Enclosed, please find the revised version of my constitutional amendment to create the new University of 
California Online.  I emailed you the redline changes earlier today. 

Thank you in advance for your full attention of this matter. 

Sincerely, 

Enclosure 

INITIATIVE MEASURE TO BE SUBMITTED DIRECTLY TO THE VOTERS 

17-0025 

Arndt. :11  I 

12-point 
Boldface 
~ 

The Attorney General of California has prepared the following circulating title and 

summary of the chief purpose and points of the proposed measure: 

(Here set forth the unique numeric identifier provided by the Attorney General and 

circulating title and summary prepared by the Attorney General.  Both the Attorney 
General's unique numeric identifier and the circulating title and summary must also be 
printed across the top of each page of the petition whereon signatures are to appear.) 

TO THE HONORABLE SECRETARY OF STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

Type: Roman 
Boldface not 
Smaller than 
12-point 

We, the undersigned, registered, qualified voters of California, residents of Orange 

County, hereby propose amendments to the Constitution of California, relating to the 
University of California, and petition the Secretary of State to submit the same to the 
voters of California for their adoption or rejection at the next succeeding general election 
or at any special statewide election held prior to that general election or as otherwise 
provided by law.  The proposed constitutional amendments read as follows: 

The University of California Online 

SECTION 1.  The People of California find and declare all of the following: 

(a)  The public has the right to audit all publicly owned postsecondary courses and 

programs online at no cost. 

(b) The public has the right to access, attend, earn full credit, and earn full degrees 
in all publicly owned for-credit postsecondary, accredited degree programs and 
courses online at cost. 

(c)  The purpose of this measure is, without impacting the tax payer:  to further the 
public's right to audit all publicly owned postsecondary courses and programs 
online; to further the public's right to access, attend, earn full credit, and earn 
full degrees in all publicly owned for-credit postsecondary, accredited degree 
programs and courses online; to minimize the cost of that access for in-state 
students;  to create a high quality, fully accredited, publicly accessible, free/low 
cost, for-credit online university, known as the University of California Online, 
to facilitate that access;  to create a new path for UC, CSU, and CCC students to 

access impacted classes and finish their UC, CSU, and CCC degrees, 
respectively, online;  to create a new path for students to earn credit for and 
possibly enroll into UC;  to encourage the use of open educational resources;  to 
require that tuition at the new university include course books and materials;  to 
lower the cost of all UCO, UC, CSU, and CCC books- by creating large buyers 
of books (UCO and the UCO Bookstore) better able to negotiate lower book 
prices;  to require tuition charged to students at the new university reflect actual 
costs and expenses, only;  to create funding for merit based in-state Division II 
student scholarships, student food pantries, and need based in-state student 
housing; to require fully transparent tuition cost accounting at UCO; and, to 
authorize full funding of UCO. 

SECTION 2.  Section 10 is added to Article IX of the California Constitution, to read: 

SECTION 10. 

(a) For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings: 

(1)  "Access" means full access, the full ability of all students to enroll into UCO 

without gatekeeping. 

(2)  "All publicly owned postsecondary courses" and "programs" means every 

unique course and program- excluding duplicates - listed in every UC, CSU, or 
CCC syllabus. 

(3)  "At cost" means two things:  the student must pay and the price shall reflect the 

actual cost. 

(4)  "At no cost" means free. 
(5)  "CCC" means the California Community Colleges. 
(6)  "Completing courses at their own pace" means all online students may enroll, 
take tests, turn in their papers, and complete the course when they are ready. 
(7)  "Gatekeeping" means controlling, limiting, and/or finding reasons to exclude 

students from admission. 

(8)  "CSU" means the California State University. 
(9)  "Governors" means the Governors of the California Community Colleges. 
(10) 

"Lab" means a science laboratory segment in a science course or any other 

portion of a course that requires the student to be physically present. 

(11) 
(12) 
(13) 

"Public" means any student in-state or out-of-state. 
"Regents" means the Regents of the University of California. 
"Student" means any member of the public in-state or out-of-state attending 

or wanting to attend UCO. 

"Trustees" means the Trustees of the California State University. 
"UC" means the University of California. 
·"UCO" means the University of California Online. 
"UCO Bookstore" means UCO's nonprofit textbook store. 

(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) "UCO President" means the President of the University of California Online. 

(b) Notivithstanding Section 9, the Regents and the UCO President, appointed pursuant to 
subdivision (e), shall _establish a separate o:nline university-with its own president, faculty, 
budget, academic senate, and endowment - consisting of all publicly owned postsecondary 
courses, programs, and digital libraries to be known as the "University of California 
Online."  UCO will be comprised of the following tivo academic divisions: 

(1)  Division I, the "free'' division, shall authorize the public to audit all UCO courses, 
programs, and digital libraries at no cost and to question professors, access course 
books, course materials, and labs at cost. 

(2) Division II, the "for-credit" division, shall authorize public access and attendance of 
all UCO for-credit courses and programs, including courses with labs.  Students may 
earn full credit and full academic degrees.  Enrollment shall be open to all who apply. 
Students may complete courses at their own pace.  Division II shall have tuition and, if 
applicable, lab fees and out-of-state fees.  Over time, tuition for Division II shall be set 
to cover all costs of both divisions.  Tuition shall vary by course.  Specific course tuition 
after reflecting UCO fixed, start up, and creation costs on a prorated basis, shall be 
based on the variable costs to create, deliver, and teach that specific course, amortized 
by the number of students.  UCO may only pass on legitimate costs to students.  Tuition 
and lab fees charged to students shall not exceed projected costs.  Specific course tuition 
shall include specific course books and materials.  Especially in the initial startup years: 
the UCO President shall base tuition on estimated costs and projections; with regards 
to establishing the fixed cost portion of tuition, the UCO President shall amortize long 
term fixed costs by the duration of the financing bonds authorized in paragraph (h). 
UCO's line item cost accounting shall be transparent and publically viewable online. 

(c) The Regents and UCO President shall ensure UCO Division II course curriculum is at 
least as rigorous as UC's, fully accredited, and fungible with UC.  The Trustees and the 
Governors shall ensure that UCO Division II course credit is accepted as fully accredited 
course credit in their respective segments.  If a CSU and CCC course ( or any other 
university course) meets UCO's high standard, the Regents and the UCO President shall 
accept that course credit as UCO course credit. 

(d) The Regents and the UCO President shall encourage, but not require, the use of lower 
cost or free open educational resources.  The Regents and the UCO President shall 
establish a nonprofit textbook bookstore - to be known as the UCO Bookstore - of all 
UCO, UC, CSU, and CCC textbooks.  The UCO Bookstore shall buy back used student 
books at a fair market price. 

(e) The Regents shall appoint the UCO President with full power to create, implement, 
administer, and lead UCO.  If the office of the UCO President is vacant for 180 days for 
any reason, the Governor shall appoint the UCO President.  The UCO President shall serve 
at the pleasure of the appointing entity and shall be an ex officio member of the Regents. 

(f) Although UCO is an online university, some courses may require the student to be 
physically present in a lab or academic setting.  UCO is authorized to teach and deliver lab 

segments of classes offline and - notwithstanding paragraph (2) of subdivision. (b) - in such 
cases the UCO lab professor shall dictate the lab's schedule and pace.  As student demand 
is identified for such labs, the UCO President shall contract with other entities, public or 
private, local to the students, as necessary, to meet this demand.  UCO may require tests to 
be proctored, offline, in a physical setting.  As student demand for proctoring is identified, 
the UCO President may contract with other entities, public or private, local to the student 
to meet this demand.  Labs and proctoring are student costs. 

(g).  Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of subdivision (b ), the Regents and the UCO President 
shall charge out-of-state Division II students - in addition to tuition -- out-of-state Division 
II student fees.  The UCO President shall maximize these out-of-state Division II student 
fees.  The UCO President shall use all out-of-state Division II student fee revenues to fund: 
merit based in-state Division II student scholarships; UCO, UC, CSU, and CCC student 
food pantries; need based in-state student housing.  The UCO President shall:  devise a 
merit based in-state Division II student scholarship program; make reciprocal agreements 
with UC, CSU, and CCC student food pantries; and devise a need based in-state student 
housing plan to apply such revenues. 

(h).  Once approved by the voters the Treasurer shall issue the appropriate bonds in an 
appropriate amount to fund UCO in its entirety.  UCO shall repay these bonds from the 
tuition received. 

